# Sexenio absolutista (1814-1820)
Fernando VII returned to Spain in 1814 after the Treaty of Valençay, which recognized him as the king of Spain.  
As soon as he came back, he looked for the support of the conservative elite and the army. This resulted in the restoration of absolutism, in which he suppressed the Constitution of 1812 and persecuted, jailed or forced to exile liberals.
However, many liberals that fought in the Peninsular War did not give up. This led to pronunciamientos, which military uprisings against him.

# Trienio liberal
An army was supposed to embark to America to suppress the independence rebellions. Instead, they were led by colonel Riego in an uprising against Fernando. 
Unlike other pronunciamientos, this uprising was successful, and forced Fernando to restore the liberal reforms and swear the Constitution of 1812.  
During this period, the liberals were divided:
- Doceañistas (moderate liberals, later called conservatives): They wanted to implement liberal reforms slowly. They were closer to the Old Regime and tried to negotiate with its supporters.
- Exaltados (radical liberals, later called progressives): They wanted a complete separation from the Old Regime.

# Década Ominosa
Fernando VII invoked the Treaty of Holy Alliance to get help from foreign absolutist powers. A French army, called Los Cien Mil Hijos de San Luis, invaded Spain and restored the absolutist throne.  
During this period, Fernando took reactionary absolutist measures, such as the restoration of the Inquisition and the closure of universities.  
However, he had a daughter, Isabel, in 1830. He wanted her to be his successor, but the absolutists wanted his brother, Carlos María de Isidro. As a result, Fernando looked for the support from the doceañistas.  
There was also the Salic Law, which forbade women succession. Fernando decided to replace it with the Pragmática Sanción to ensure Isabel would heir the throne.  
His death triggered the First Carlist War (1833-1840), which confronted the supporters of Carlos (Carlistas) and the supporters of Isabel (Isabelinos).