# Political parties
Moderate party: conservatives, they wanted the sovereignty to be shared between the king and the parliament, censitarian suffrage, centralized administration and confessional religion. It was supported by the nobility and the high classes.  
Progressive Party: radical liberals, they wanted parliamentary sovereignty, universal suffrage, local autonomy and more freedom of religion. It was supported by the middle class and the lower classes.  
Democratic party, created in 1849.  
Republican party.  
Liberal Union party.

# Minority reign (1833-1843)
When Fernando VII died, Isabel was 3 years old, which meant that her mother, Maria Cristina of Naples reigned as a regent.  

## First Carlist War
However, the carlists wanted Fernando's brother, Carlos María Isidro, as the king of Spain. They advocated absolutism and traditions ("Dios, Rey, Patria y Fueros"). Carlism was widespread in the north.  
The supporters of Isabel wanted a transition to a moderate regime. They army (led by general Espartero) and the urban population kept loyal to Isabel.  

## Regency of Maria Cristina (1833-1840)
Maria Cristina started the transition to a moderate regime, under a constitutional monarchy. She was supported by moderates and reformists.  
During the first period, the Estatuto Real was approved, which recognized some rights, but it was not a constitution, as it did not recognize national sovereignty. There was a representation (Cortes) with consulative functions.  
The progressists thought that this was not enough, so they revolted and took control. The Motín de la Granja took place, which forced the regent to restore the Constitution of 1812.  
Under the minister Mendizábal, they approved the Constitution of 1837 (less radical than the one of 1812) and implemented more liberal reforms, such as the desamortización, which nationalized Manos Muertas in order to get funds for the wars.  
After this, the regent gave all the power to the moderate party, which they used to inverse some of the reforms. The progressists were not happy about that, and they revolted, this time forcing her to exile.

## Regency of General Espartero (1840-1843)
Baldomero Espartero was a progressist general that reigned during a short amount of time before he was expelled.


# Majority reign (1844-1868)

## Moderate Decade (1844-1854)
It was a conservative regime, based on the Constitution of 1845, which reinforced the queen's powers. The progressists were repressed and the democratic party was suppressed.

# Progressive Biennium (1854-1856)
The progressives staged a coup d'etat, known as the Vicalvarada, led by O'Donnell. The progressists took power and implemented more liberal reforms, such as a second desamortización, which promoted industrial development and the building of railways. A Constitution was written, but the moderates took power before it was approved.  

# Crisis of Moderantism (1856-1868)
The government took reactionary, conservative measures. Students, politicians, the military and the opposition were harshly repressed. In addition to that, there was an economical and subsistence crisis. Censorship was also used to control the dissemination of ideas.  
A coup d'etat was planned from abroad by the opposition, led by O'Donnell in the Liberal Union. They signed the Pact of Ostend (1866), in which they committed to expel the queen (not the monarchy) from the government, summon Constituent Courts and to create a government based on democratic ideals.
In September 1868, a successful revolt led by Prim and Serrano took place in Cádiz, which received popular support. The Revolución Gloriosa of 1868 forced Isabel II to exile to France. This started the Sexenio Democrático.
