# Economy
## General situation
The starting years after the Great War were marked by a great economic crisis. They were characterized by:
1. Low production rates, due to the destruction of the industries.
2. Unemployment, due to the lack of industries and the incorporation of women into the workforce.
3. Monetary devaluation
4. Social problems, due to the post-war effects and the economic crisis.

## The Roaring Twenties, or The Crazy 1920s
The US, however, returned from the war victorious and strong. As its mainland was not affected by the war, its industry and economy was barely affected. The US started to give loans to Europe to help them in their economic situation.  
The payback of the loans, the increase in exports, and development of modern industry made the US the largest political and economic force, and the most thriving country.  
It was the first country to develop consumerism, as American families could afford, for the first time, buying consumer goods such as cars and home appliances thanks to the loans and credits granted by banks. It was called the "American way of life", and it did not spread to other countries until after the Second World War.

## Germany
It was the most affected country, as it had to pay insuperable war reparations after the Treaty of Versailles.
- The Weimar Republic started to print money, which only worsened the situation, because it caused hyperinflation and the currency became worthless, as the prices increased. 1923 was a especially tough year, as the hyperinflation reached a maximum. 
- As they could not pay the money, the French military (who also needed to pay back the loans to the US) occupied the Ruhr valley in 1923, the main mining and industrial region of the country. The German were badly treated and killed, contributing to their feeling of revenge.
- The Weimar Republic tried to regenerate the international relations. This made the victors of the Great War reduce the conditions of the Treaty of Versailles and aid German economy.

## Politics: International relations
Despite the creation of the League of Nations (which was relatively weak), international relations were tense.  
In 1925, the signing of the Treaties of Locarno (1925) defined territorial borders and normalized Germany's relations, which improved the international situation. The tension was dissolved. This, combined with the loans of the US, allowed the European economy to improve and it increased the production levels of pre-war years (1924-1929).  
After the First World War, democracies were victorious, but they soon entered a situation of crisis, and totalitarianism arrived in countries such as Spain, Italy, Germany or the Soviet Union.