# Crisis of 1929
During the 1920s, the US economy had marginalized the agricultural sector. Its economy was based on an industry of consumer goods financed on loans. However, this proved fatal.  
The crisis of 1929 was correlated to the crash of the New York Stock Exchange. The economic system based on loans proved to be unsustainable. It was characterized by massive unemployment and the closure of banks.  
The crash of the New York Stock Exchange took place in 1929 and can be summarized in the following process:
1. Consumers acquired products by loans.
2. Firms started to sell actions in response to their success.
3. Due to the growth of consumer behavior, actions' prices were constantly increasing.
4. The middle class realized about this and started to buy actions with the hopes of reselling them at a higher price later (speculation). Most stocks were purchased with loans.
5. The New York Stack Exchange was overvalued, and stocks reached record highs.
6. Suddenly, a feeling of distrust on the firms appeared (people thought they would lose value shortly afterwards), so suddenly many actions were sold, but most were not bought again, as they wanted to get out of the market.
7. The actions lost most of their value and, as people could not repay the loans provided for the stock purchases, the banks crashed as they were unable to collect the loans granted.
8. The firms lost value and a large capital. Many had to close down.
9. Industries were closed down and the production declined. Workers lost their jobs and were unemployed. Many became suddenly poor and could not afford many products, decreasing the demand.
10. This cycle repeated and worsened the situation.

# The Great Depression
The US government responded to the crisis by increasing import tariffs. European countries responded by applying protectionist measures, which further cut international trade.  
Additionally, the US cancelled the loans given to Europe, which affected the countries and globalized the economic crisis.  
The Great Depression became the worst economic crisis of the capitalist system, because of its intensity, reach and duration. It lasted the entire 1930s and it was especially intense between 1930 and 1932. It is considered as one of the causes of the Second World War.  
It especially affected to the US, Germany, Great Britain and Austria. There were a number of factors that characterized it:
- Decline of industrial production.
- Fall and bankruptcy of banks and firms.
- Mass unemployment.
- Fall of prices and salaries.

# Main affected countries and their measures
Since the capitalist system proved that it was not perfect with the Great Depression, many countries decided to apply protectionist measures, similar to those in the mixed economic systems.  
Although trade agreements were made, most countries applied their own measures, which meant that world trade came to a halt, which only made things worse.  
These measures slightly improved the situation, but the Great Depression would continue, and it would not be completely recovered after a long process.

## The US
President Roosevelt proposed the New Deal (1933), a shock plan made to revive the economy. It was based on state intervention: promotion of public works, subsidies for firms, control of banking, and more social welfare.

## Germany
Germany, which was already in an economic crisis, was the most affected, as it stopped receiving the economic aid from other countries, and had to pay back the loans given by the US.  
The government imposed conservative policies, such as cutting state expenditures and promoting deflation, which ended up making the situation worse.  
Unemployment reached an alarming record of 6 million unemployed workers, which additionally caused social unrest and social polarization. Many Germans were convinced that the democracy of the Weimar Republic was not working.  
This situation allowed the Nationalist Socialist Worker's Party to achieve power, as Hitler claimed to be the only one able to recover Germany's prosperity by radical measures.

## Great Britain
Despite having 3 million unemployed workers, the state did not intervene in the economy.  
The pound was devalued by 25%, which lost value against foreign currencies, but favored exports and strengthened the domestic market.  
They also applied protectionist measures despite their tradition in free policy.

## France
France promoted a policy of deflation. Expenditures were cut and interest rates were high.  
Salaries were also lowered.

## Japan
Japan decided to fix its economic and demographic problems with imperialism. The country started to compete for control of European colonies in Asia and China.

## The USSR
As the USSR's economy was based on socialist premises, it was not affected by the capitalist crisis.  
Furthermore, they were experiencing a rapid industrialization (especially military) and economic growth in the Stalin era, although this system proved to be inefficient in the long run.