# Crisis of Democracies
The democracies initially triumphed after the Great War.  
The new states that arose from the war incorporated democratic principles.  
However, the democracies soon entered a period of crisis that led to the rise of totalitarian regimes:
- Socio-economic:
    - Crises of the capitalist system, which include the post-war crisis (1919-1923) and the Great Depression (1929-1939). Unemployment and poverty led to people thinking that democracies were not working.
    - Strengthening of labor unions, which led to the middle class to support totalitarian regimes against them.
- Political:
    - Political instability of the new countries, as they did not have a tradition on democracy like the US or Great Britain. This was also the case with Germany.
    - Fear of the spread of communism after the October Revolution. The workers' movements had high expectations and wanted the same. E.g. the Spartacus League (communist) in Germany, that organized a failed revolution against the Weimar Republic. This frightened the middle class, which rejected the participation of workers' parties in the Parliament. This caused social polarization (i.e., the people moved to the extremes, either far right or left).
- Ideological:
    - Loss of faith in science, reason and progress after the catastrophic events of the war.

The main countries managed to overcome the crisis and prevent the rise of fascism:
- US: it had isolated itself from the international relations, as it did not join the League of Nations. The society was very puritanical, as it did not want to get involved into the problems of the world and prohibited alcohol.
- France: it had to resort to a left-wing coalition government, the Popular Front.
- Great Britain: it managed to preserve democracy thanks to the solidity of its political institutions.

# Totalitarianism
At the end of the First World War, only Russia and Hungary had totalitarian regimes, but totalitarianism managed to spread to the world because of the crisis that democracy experienced.  
The main totalitarian countries before the Second World War were the Soviet Union, Italy, Germany, Spain and Portugal.

## Main characteristics
The main feature of totalitarianism is the "total" and absolute control of the state over the country. It is the completely opposite of liberalism and democracy.  
There are some general characteristics that totalitarian systems shared:
- Revolution: they generally came to power by overthrowing an existing government, usually a democratic one.
- Extreme idealism: They justified their repression with the idea of transforming the country into a utopia. A specific "right" ideology was imposed into society. E.g. Fascism, Nazism, Communism.
- Extreme nationalism and/or expansionism: the superiority of the homeland race was asserted, which resulted in xenophobia. It was tightly related to the concept of making the country great again (Roman Empire or the Holy Roman Empire). Communist regimes (more specifically the USSR) are not considered as "nationalist", as it was thought to be a bourgeois ideology, but looked for the spread of communism over the world, which led to the territorial expansion of the USSR.
- Single party or regime: other parties were prohibited and suppressed. E.g. Nazi Party, Nationalist Fascist Party, Communist Party.
- Single leader or dictator: the leader served as a charismatic and indisputable guide. Cults were made around them. They were characterized because of their powerful speeches. E.g. Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin.
- Corporate state: the society was organized in associations or corporations directed by an elite, i.e., a small group of people controlled every aspect of life. E.g. Nomenklatura.
- Exaltation of defense and war: military readiness and war was essential for totalitarian regimes, as it scared the opposition and put them into submission. They were often hostile towards international institutions and organizations (leading to the decline of the League of Nations). The youth were military educated and the military received huge funds.
- Autarky and central planning economy: the country had to be self-sufficient, i.e., it had to be able to produce its needs by itself, without relying on exports. This led to the state to control the economy.
- Use of propaganda and terror: manipulation was an important aspect of totalitarianism, as the masses give their support and the opposition had to be wiped out. The children were often the main target. The state controlled the media and censored dissident ideas, which were not tolerated in any form. Short slogans and simple ideas were repeated in their propaganda. The police often operated outside of laws and regulations to spread terror and control the population.
- Anti-liberalism: liberal constitutions and individual rights were abolished. Democracy was especially hated, as it was considered to be "stupid, corrupt and inefficient".
- Scapegoating: a specific group, usually an ethnic minority, was blamed for most of the setbacks. They were persecuted and badly treated. E.g. Jews, kulaks.

## Italian Fascism

### Precedents
Italian fascism had its roots in the nationalism that emerged in its unification.  
There were a number of factors that contributed to the rise of fascism:
- Frustration over Italy's lack of importance: in the Paris Peace Treaties, Italy had been promised some territories, but they were only given a fraction in the end. This made Italians feel that foreigners did not give Italy importance or recognition.
- Economic crisis: resulted from the destruction of the war that started the crisis of the initial years of the interwar era.
- Feminism: after the Great War, women kept their jobs, which meant that many soldiers lost them. Many men were also unable to assimilate the idea of a change of roles in society, which led to them to despise feminism, as more of them became unemployed.
- Social polarization: the triumph of the Bolsheviks in Russia and the economic situation led to the growth of labor movements. The intense activity of trade unions and workers' parties resulted in social unrest, which scared the middle and high classes. As democracy was not working, people moved to the extremes.

### Benito Mussolini
The leader and starter of the fascist movement.  
- His behavior was characterized by violence, arrogance, ambition and radicalism. He hated to lose or accepting a mistake. Nevertheless, he was a charismatic and attractive person.
- His sense of injustice towards the wealthy placed him in a socialist position.
- He worked for a newspaper, which allowed him to spread his views.
- He was arrested multiple times because of his violence.
- During the First World War, he initially supported Italy's neutrality. However, he realized that it could be an opportunity to extend a social revolution and give Italy the importance it deserved, and suddenly became pro-war. Because of this, his socialist party expelled him. After the Great War, he turned to nationalism and founded the Nationalist Fascist Party (PNF).
- He obtained his initially support from far-right war veterans who feared communism. They became a paramilitary force called the Black Shirts.
- He became an inspiration to many dictators. Hitler was one of his admirers.

### Characteristics of Fascism
- It had all the characteristics of totalitarian systems.
- "Fascism" comes from the word "fasces", a Roman symbol that represented power and strength through unity.
- The fascist movement aimed to restore Italy's international status and make it look like a great power. It compared itself to the greatness of the Roman Empire. With extreme nationalism, this led to expansionism and imperialism.
- Anti-feminism: the patriarchy was supported. It ended with the problem of unemployed men.
- Anti-communism: as it was diametrically opposed to their ideology.
- After the 1930s, Italian Fascism adopted some Nazi ideologies, such as Anti-Semitism.

### Rise and Fascist Italy
1. Foundation of the PNF (1921): by Benito Mussolini, establishing himself as its indisputable leader, "Il Duce". The fascist Blackshirts started to fight the left-wing parties in the streets, contributing to the preexisting chaos. They gained the support of the middle class.
2. March on Rome (1925): Mussolini encouraged Blackshirts to march on Rome in an attempt to seize power. Victor Emmanuel III named Mussolini Prime Minister (due to the fear of a civil war). Mussolini started to dismantle democracy and establish a dictatorship. The PNF was the only party allowed, and violent and manipulative tactics started to be used to crush the opposition.
3. Assassination of Matteotti (1925): he was a socialist deputy that denounced fascist violence. The Parliament was dissolved and a totalitarian dictatorship was confirmed. The state controlled every aspect of the country. Strikes or public demonstrations against the new regime were punished and the opposition persecuted. Women were forbidden from having jobs.
4. Crisis of 1929: the new economic system based on public works resulted in a success and greatly reduced unemployment. This also meant the start of an expansionist and imperialist policy, especially focused on Ethiopia (which had previously managed to remain independent after the first Italian invasion), Albania and the Balkans (to control the Adriatic Sea).
5. Pact of Steel (1939): Fascist Italy allied with Nazi Germany, which led to both of them fighting together in the Second World War.

## German Nazism

### Causes
- Lack of a tradition on democracy: after the Great War, a new regime was imposed, the Weimar Republic. It was one of the most advanced democratic systems in Europe, as it granted political and social rights and enabled a rich cultural life. However, Germany had always had a tradition on authoritarian systems, and the Weimar Republic was their first experience with democracy, which led to political instability and constant uprisings.
- Feeling of humiliation: the Treaty of Versailles imposed heavy conditions to the Germans, which led to their economic situation (unemployment, hyperinflation) and their feeling of revenge and humiliation after the Great War. Despite the fact that the Weimar Republic regenerated their relationships with the Allies and managed to convince them to reduce the conditions, the German population gradually began to see them as a threat as the Nazi Party imposed their ideology.
- Feminism: same as Italian fascism. Matters got worse in the Great Depression, where women kept their jobs more than men (because their wages were lower).
- The Great Depression: it was the immediate cause of their rise. The Nazi Party claimed to be the only one able to solve the situation, which led to a considerable population voting for them.

### Adolf Hitler
Leader and starter of Nazism.
- His behavior consisted on quick angering, passionate and arrogant. He was charismatic and had a natural talent for speeches.
- He was heavily influenced by Mussolini's actions during his first years, and admired him until he became more powerful.
- He was Austrian, but he considered himself German, as he advocated the idea of German nationalism.
- He initially tried to become an artist, but he failed. Combined with the death of his parents, Adolf started to live in poverty and unemployment in the streets. He developed many of his radical ideas, especially Anti-Semitism, during these years.
- As a firm nationalist, he was a big supporter of the Great War, and enlisted as a volunteer. This period would greatly affect his mentality. After Germany's surrender, he blamed Jews and Communists for the defeat (because of their anti-war stance).
- He joined the DAP (German Workers' Party), which shared his extreme ideology. His speaking abilities impressed the members and he soon became their leader. He renamed the party to NSDAP (Nationalist Socialist German Workers' Party), the Nazi Party. Despite the use of "socialist" in their name, they were a far-right, nationalist, anti-Marxist, fascist party. Their flag was a swastika with the colors of the Second Reich. The party soon became the leader in the far-right thanks to Hitler.

### Characteristics of Nazism
It can be described as a type of fascism, and shared most of its characteristics.
- Leadership of the Führer (guide), Adolf Hitler.
- Its main idea circles around the belief of a "master, noble race", the Aryan race. All other races were considered inferior. The Aryan population increase was the women's role in the Nazi regime.
- Extreme censorship of modern art and culture, as it was considered "degenerate". Many works of art were destroyed as they opposed to their ideology or did not fit their likings.
- Persecution of minority groups, because they considered that they "polluted the master race" by mixing with them. These groups included Jews, impaired people, homosexuals, dissidents, etc.
- Desire of revenge against the Allies, especially the French, because of their defeat in the First World War and the Treaty ("Diktat") of Versailles, which was said to humiliate and weaken Germany.
- Necessity of "living space". German expansion (especially towards the east) led to the invasion of several countries and the Second World War. This allowed for the expansion of the Aryan race and the exploitation of resources.

### Rise and Nazi Germany
1. Creation of the NSDAP (Munich, 1920): From 1921, it had a paramilitary group, the Brownshirts (Storm Detachment, SA), like other parties. They fought against the left-wing parties (particularly communists) in the streets. Many German soldiers that lost their job after the military reduction of the Treaty of Versailles joined this group. There was also another paramilitary group formed of elite Nazis, the SS, led by Himmler, which was initially formed as a bodyguard unit.
2. Munich Putsch, or the Beer Hall Putsch (1923): Adolf Hitler took advantage of the weakness of the government after the hyperinflation. The occupation of the Ruhr (Germans were killed by French soldiers) also created a state of social unrest. Hitler attempted to stage a coup, inspired by the March on Rome staged by Mussolini, but they failed.
3. Hitler was tried for treason, but thanks to his speeches and the support from right-wing judges, he was imprisoned for only 5 years (from which he only served 9 months). He used this time to write Mein Kampf (My struggle), a book that largely explained Nazi ideology.
4. Crisis of 1929: as the US could not grant more loans and wanted Germany to pay back his, 6 million workers became unemployed and poverty became widespread. Germans realized that democracy was not working for them, which led to social polarization. The Nazis blamed the Jews, the Versailles Treaty and the communists.
5. The crisis weakened the Weimar Republic. Gradually, the Nazi Party increased its vote share. Both lower and middle classes voted for them. In 1932, they won 230 out of 600 seats in the parliament, although Hitler did not manage to become President.
6. As the Weimar Republic feared the rise of communism (they attempted a failed revolution), Hindenburg, the President of the Republic, appointed Hitler chancellor of a coalition government in 1933, because he thought he would be easier to manipulate than communists.
7. The Reichstag (one of the 2 legislative bodies) building was set in fire. It is not certain who did it. However, Hitler used this as an opportunity to blame the communists. Hindenburg gave Hitler emergency powers, allowing him to start dismantling the democratic system and suppress the left-wing opposition.
8. The Enabling Act of 1933 was passed, which gave Hitler more power. After Hindenburg's death, he went on to establish the Third Reich, with himself as the dictator of the totalitarian regime.
    - The public institutions and the population were submitted to the Führer's obedience.
    - Political parties related to the Nazis were absorbed, while the opposition was dissolved.
    - Trade unions were replaced by the German Working Front (DAF).
    - The Reichsrat (the other legislative body) was dissolved, while the Reichstag lost its legislative power.
    - Every aspect of German life was changed to Nazi standards: standard greeting, fascist salute, military service, etc.
    - The Treaty of Versailles was completely dismissed, as the military was expanded with the Wehrmacht, the Kriegsmarine and the Luftwaffe.
    - Propaganda (directed by Goebbels) was used massively to control the masses. From that moment, everything was manipulated, including history, to promote Nazi ideology.
9. The night of the long knives (June 1933): There were conflicts between the SA and the German army. Röhm, the leader of the SA, wanted the SA to replace the German army. Hitler, who did not trust the SA, started an operation carried out by the Nazi party (mainly the SS, who had became the main paramilitary group by that moment) that led to the assassination of the SA leaders and other political dissidents. After this event, the professional army pledged total allegiance towards the Führer.
10. Nuremberg Laws (1935): Jews were stripped of German citizenship and were not allowed to work in liberal professions. Marriage with Jews was forbidden and Germans were discouraged from interacting with them.
11. Germany recovers the industrial production of 1929 (1935): the economic policy was mainly due to ideological reasons, but it turned to be a success. Unemployment decreased considerably. Their prosperity was based on the looting of Jew properties, the expansion to other territories, public works, and the massive industrialization and militarization.
12. Foundation of the Gestapo (1936): it was a subdivision of the SS that worked as a political police with full powers that persecuted the opposition of the Third Reich. They led the concentration camps, firsts of which were created the same year.
13. The night of broken glass (1938): it was an attack carried by the SA against the Jews. Many of them were murdered, tortured and imprisoned, while their synagogues and shops were destroyed and looted. The Nazis denied their involvement.
14. Pact of Steel (1939): Nazi Germany allied with Fascist Italy. Hitler would become the main dictator while Mussolini would be just an ally.
15. Hitler began to claim and invade several European territories. As the Allies wanted to avoid another international conflict, they followed a policy of appeasement, which consisted on tolerating Hitler's actions. However, he kept going and France and Great Britain ended up declaring war after the invasion of Poland, thus leading to the Second World War.
16. The holocaust or "Shoah" (1941-1945): 6 million European Jews were executed in termination camps such as Auschwitz. Millions of other ethnic or religious minorities, dissidents, or the impaired were exterminated as well.

## The Stalin era
After the Russian Revolutions, Stalin had been granted the role of General Secretary, due to his relatively low intellectual background. However, he realized that controlling the committees and the jobs, he could gradually gain power. He slowly tried to convince the Soviets that he was the heir to Lenin, whose health was rapidly declining.  
In 1924, Lenin died after a series of strokes. After a fierce competition, he managed to establish himself as the indisputable leader.  
Trotsky was his main rival, and he was expelled from the Soviet Union. He founded the Fourth International, but he was assassinated in 1940 by a Soviet agent sent by Stalin.

### Joseph Stalin
Known as the "man of steel", the Georgian ruler controlled every aspect of the Soviet Union.
- As the other dictators, he was a violent man, and was arrested by the Tsarist police and exiled to Siberia.
- He was an active member of the Bolshevik Party. However, he had some differences with them and distrusted them after his rise to power. This distrust would evolve to his paranoid attitude that led to Stalinist purges.

### Stalinist USSR
It followed the characteristics of totalitarian countries:
- Central planning economy: it aimed autarky.
    1. Removal of the remains of capitalism.
    2. Five-Year Plans: they established goals and production quotas for all sectors. Although his system caused famines in the countryside, it heavily industrialized the country and was not affected by the Great Depression, as it was a communist economic policy.
        - Agriculture collectivization: kulaks (wealthier landowners) were stripped off their lands and eliminated. Peasants were replaced with tractors, and all were forced to work on national collective farms. However, this proved to be inefficient.
        - Heavy industrialization: it was the main aim of these plans, as Stalin realized how backward was the country. The military industry was the main one affected.
    3. Famines: although cities thrived, most agricultural products were destined to the military and the industry, which meant that peasants died by starvation. Although Soviet propaganda depicted the opposite, this economic policy created the largest man-made famine in history, with 10 million deaths.
- Socio-political situation: it was based on the idealization of Stalin and the repression of society.
    - A personal cult was established around him.
    - The nomenklatura was a complex and highly organized party bureaucracy that held an administrative position. It essentially controlled the Communist Party.
    - The Great Purge consisted on mass purges to eliminate anyone who was considered as a dissident or enemy. Around 10 million were jailed, executed or sent to concentration camps. Even top members of the Communist Party were eliminated.
    - The NKVD was the secret police that directed the purges.
    - The Comintern had total control over the Communist Parties of other countries.
    - Many countries surrounding the USSR were absorbed into it during the Second World War, and Stalinism was also imposed in them.
- Ideology:
    - Stalin defended the idea of Socialism in One Country, which stated that once the revolution was over, the USSR should strengthen itself internally. It opposed Trotsky's permanent revolution, which stated that revolution did not end until carried internationally.
    - Anti-Semitism was adopted in the Stalin's final years.
