# Precedents and rise to power
The crisis of 1917 and the Trienio Bolchevique led to the army recovering its role in politics. This meant that Miguel Primo de Rivera staged a coup d'etat in September 1923, under the promise of restoring Spain's public order, end the war in Morocco and combat corruption. He was supported by the army, the Church and the middle class.  
The king decided to accept them and appoint him Prime Minister. This allowed him to (technically) keep the monarchy, as he continued to keep his position, although it was  in practice a dictatorship led by Primo de Rivera. Alfonso XIII decided not to intervene in his government as he managed to maintain the order and end with the social crisis.

# Military directorate (1923-1925)
Primo de Rivera was advised by military generals.  
He restored the order, ended the war in Morocco, and removed the powers of Catalonia (destroyed Mancomunidad).  
He adopted some totalitarian characteristics:
- Authoritarian government.
- Restricted political participation. The parliament was dissolved, and the political parties and trade unions banned.
- Charismatic leader, Primo de Rivera.
- The society was restructured in a corporatist model.
- He adopted the Italian fascist economic model, with state intervention and a policy of public works, which modernized Spanish infrastructure and decreased unemployment. However, this created a large national debt.

# Civil directorate (1925-1930)
He tried to prevent social unrest and transform the dictatorship into a semi-parliamentary government by founding the only permitted party: the Patriotic Union, which was intended to include all social classes. The parliament was replaced with the National Consulative Assembly.  
However, republican opposition began to form in 1928, which was joined by intellectuals, trade unions, and left-wing organizations.  
This problem was added to the large budget deficit produced by the civil-engineering policy (which was intensified in this period), which was made even worse with the Great Depression.  
Gradually, Primo de Rivera began to lose support, even from the army and the king, and was forced to resign in early 1930.

# Aftermath
After Primo de Rivera's resignation, Alfonso XIII tried to restore the political system of the Restoration, by appointing General Berenguer and Admiral Aznar (later) to govern. However, both had little success as the republican opposition strengthened against the monarchy (which lost popularity when it supported Primo de Rivera).  
The Pact of San Sebastián was signed in 1930 by the republicans, who aimed to topple the regime. It started military uprisings which failed, but increased their support.  
Republicans had a majority in the municipal elections of April 1931, which led to the king exiling himself and the start of the Second Spanish Republic.