# Provisional republican government (April-June 1931)
After the exile of Alfonso XIII, a provisional republican government was formed, which aimed to call general elections for the constituent Cortes.  
Moderate Niceto Alcalá Zamora was elected as President of the Republic (regulated the system and moderated the President of the Government) and Manuel Azaña as the first President of the Government.  
The Second Republic was democratically elected and wrote the Constitution of 1931. This constitution aimed to lay the foundations of a modern democratic system, with social justice, freedom, and individual rights and liberties. It declared Spain as a "Democratic republic of workers from all classes, which organized in a regime of freedom and justice". Its main points were:
- Political system: Republic.
- Statuses of autonomy: regions were given the right to write their statuses of autonomy (self-governing) according to their historical, cultural and economic characteristics.
- Parliament: single chamber with legislative powers.
- Suffrage: universal. Women were allowed to vote for the first time.
- Private property: subject to the interests of the national economy, which allowed the government to nationalize lands and property.
- A wide range of rights and liberties were recognized.
- Education and culture: were the top priority of the state.
- Religion: secularism was promoted.

# Reformist biennium (1931-1933)
It was formed of a coalition government between republicans and socialists. It was the most stable government of the Second Republic.

## Reforms
- Limited autonomy to Catalonia.
- Army: since much of the army opposed the Republic, active members were forced to pledge allegiance to it. The structure of the army was modernized. The Guardia de Asalto was formed, to counter the influence of the army and maintain the public order.
- Agrarian reform of 1932: since the Spanish economy still depended heavily on agriculture (50% of the active population were peasants), lower classes demanded reforms. Wealthier landowners were forced to sell their latifundios to the state, which redistributed them to provide plots to the poor peasants. However, this process was slow.
- Education: reforms to fight illiteracy and cultural backwardness. These reforms considerably increased federal spending and contributed to an economic crisis.
    - More than 10000 primary schools were built.
    - A secular, public, compulsory and free education was promoted.
    - The Church was dismissed from education.
    - It was supported by many intellectuals (Generations of '98, '14 and '27), which led to them supporting the Republic.
    - A cultural program was launched, the Educational Missions, which aimed to bring culture and art to villages.

## Opposition
This government found a violent opposition in both right (oligarchs, Church, landowners) and left (workers and peasants) wing organizations:
- Renovación Española, led by José Calvo Sotelo, conservative.
- The CEDA (Spanish Confederation of Autonomous Right-Wing groups), led by Jose María Gil Robles.
- The Falange, led by José Antonio Primo de Rivera. It was inspired by Italian fascism.
- CNT trade union and the FAI (Anarchist Iberian Federation): the agrarian reform was slow and inefficient, which intensified anarchist activities.
- General Sanjurjo, who staged a failed coup d'etat in 1932.

# Black biennium (1933-1936)

## Precedents
The opposition culminated in the incident of Casa Viejas in 1933, in which anarchist villagers were brutally suppressed by the Guardia de Asalto.  
This event discredited the government. Azaña was forced to resign and Niceto Alcalá Zamora held new elections.

## Rise of the CEDA and the Radical Party
The 1933 elections were won by the right-wing parties, who were allied, while the left was divided.
- The Radical Party (center-right), led by Alejandro Lerroux. It formed most of the government even though CEDA won a higher vote share.
- The CEDA, which supported the Radical Party.

The main objective was to reverse the reforms taken by the previous government and to provide amnesty for the prisoners of the failed coup led by Sanjurjo.

## Revolution of October 1934
The CEDA obtained more influence in the government. This raised fear in the left-wing groups, which feared the rise of fascism and established a workers' alliance (UHP, Uníos Hermanos Proletarios). Therefore, a general strike and the revolution of October 1934 took place.  
It failed in most regions because of lack of coordination and the harsh repression of the army. However, it obtained importance in:
- Asturias: revolutionaries took control of cities and mining areas, where they socialized the means of production.
- Catalonia: nationalists took advantage of the movement and established a federal autonomous government.

The army brutally suppressed the movement, killing thousands.

## Final stage
CEDA took a more powerful role in government, giving generals Mola and Franco in high positions of the army.  
Social polarization intensified:
- The Falange gained importance.
- Calvo Sotelo founded the National Front.
- Left-wing groups made agreements between them and formed an alliance, the Popular Front, which was formed mainly by communists, anarchists and socialists.

# 1936 elections and victory of the Popular Front (February-July 1936)
The scandal of Estraperlo discredited the government and forced Lerroux to resign.  
Again, Niceto Alcalá Zamora dissolved the Cortes and held elections in February 1936. These were won by the Popular Front and Manuel Azaña was appointed President of the Republic, dismissing Niceto Alcalá Zamora and naming Casares Quiroga as the President of the Government.  
Their main aim was to resume the reforms of the reformist biennium and to provide amnesty for the political prisoners of the black biennium.
- The Agrarian reform was reintroduced.
- Conservative laws of the black biennium were abolished.
- The Catalan parliament was given back its autonomy.
- The rest of reforms were extended.

This led to social polarization and widespread violence, as both the extreme left and right gained support.  
A group of generals led by Emilio Mola, Franco and Sanjurjo conspired against the government and prepared a coup d'etat.  
In July 1936 (Madrid), socialist Lieutenant Castillo was assassinated. His allies took revenge by killing Calvo Sotelo. This event triggered the planned military uprising, which led to the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939).