# Causes
The victory of the Popular Front in February 1936 led to some military generals to conspire against the government in spring of 1936.  
The assassinations of Calvo Sotelo and Lieutenant Castillo and pressure of the Republic triggered the start of the coup d'etat in 17-18 July 1936:
- It was led by Francisco Franco, Emilio Mola, and Sanjurjo.  
- The main initial military forces were formed of the Army of Africa, an elite and professional army that fought in Morocco.
- It was intended to be a quick and violent takeover (to avoid the reaction of the government), but the movement failed in the main areas of Spain such as Barcelona and Madrid (rebels in the Cuartel de la Montaña were stormed by anarchist and left-wing militias). This led to an immediate wide separation into "2 Spains", the Republican side, and the "Nationalist" or insurgent side.

# Belligerents
After the start of the war, Great Britain and France promoted a Non-Intervention committee in order to avoid the chance of transforming a proxy war into a global conflict. It failed as many nations ignored it.   
The war showed the ideological conflicts between communists, fascists, and democrats.

## Insurgents
- Many conservative high officers turned into the Nationalist Spain, which, combined with the Army of Africa, represented a highly organized and competent military force.
- The insurgents were also supported by the broad social sectors that opposed the government of the reformist biennium:
    - Aristocracy, landowners and middle class: they provided economic assistance and promised to defray the cost of the war.
    - Most of the Catholic Church: justified the uprising as a "national crusade" against atheism.
    - Right-wing parties: Falange, CEDA, and Carlists. The requetés were the main forces of volunteers.
- The insurgents were immediately backed up by extreme-right totalitarian regimes:
    - Nazi Germany: sent troops and vehicles. Nazis saw the Spanish Civil War as an opportunity to test the efficiency of their weaponry, strategies (blitzkrieg), and above all, its Luftwaffe. The Condor Legion proved decisive in the victory of the insurgents by giving them air superiority.
    - Fascist Italy: it sent volunteer troops. The battle proved the inefficiency of the Italian army compared to the Germans. Their marine helped to move the Army of Africa to the peninsula.
    - Portugal: it had a dictatorship led by Salazar.
    - The Vatican city gave the movement a symbolic support.

## Republicans
While the Republic was superior in number and financial resources, its lack of organization and coordination, and the territorial and ideological divisions among their forces led to their defeat.
- Although most of the army was loyal to the Republic, almost all of the professional officers either turned to the other side or were killed, which left the army without a proper organization.
- Nationalist autonomous governments of the Basque Country and Catalonia.
- The Republic enlisted volunteer militias related to the Popular Front and the UGT and CNT trade unions.
    - There were differences and conflicts among the militias, some of which intended to use the war as an opportunity to carry out a social revolution. Anarchists undertook collectivization projects in the factories.
- The Republic did not receive as much support as the other side did, and they had to withdraw:
    - The USSR: supported with equipment and training.
    - Mexico.
    - The International Brigades: they were an army formed of volunteers of different nationalities that committed to fight the rise of fascism and defend communism. It was organized by the Comintern. They were especially important in the defense of strategic posts. However, they had to withdraw in September 1938.

# Phases

## Beginning (July 1936 - March 1937)
The forces were balanced:
- The industrial and populous areas were occupied by the Republic.
- Insurgents occupied the main agricultural regions.

The insurgents tried to quickly take over the capital from two fronts:
- Emilio Mola from the north (Navarra).
- Franco from the south with the Army of Africa, which crossed the Strait of Gibraltar. They advanced through Andalucía and Extremadura, which joined the two sides.
- The terrible siege of Madrid began in November 1936.
    - The defense of Madrid became a symbol of resistance against fascism, with their motto "No pasarán".
    - The battles of Jarama and Guadalajara took place in February and March 1937. They were the two of the bloodiest battles. The insurgents failed to isolate Madrid and the republicans managed to hold the fronts. The insurgents then decided to change their strategy and focus on isolating it instead.
    - The insurgents would continue to siege Madrid until the end of the war.

## Nationalist conquests (March 1937 - October 1938)
After their defeat in the capital, the insurgents focused on the northern territory (Cantabria and Asturias, industrial areas):
- The Bombing of Guernica took place in 26 April 1937. It was carried out by the Nazi Luftwaffe and the Italian Legionary Army. The bombing destroyed Guernica (Vizcaya, Basque country), a symbol of Basque nationalism, and showed for the first time the destruction of modern warfare and the indiscriminate attacks against civilians. It allowed the insurgents to take over the north.
- Bilbao and most of the north was captured later the same year.

Insurgents took Málaga in early 1937.  
In summer of 1937, the battles of Belchite (Zaragoza) and Brunete (Madrid) took place. The Republicans opened a front in an attempt to distract insurgent forces from the north. They had little success.  
After their victory in the north, they focused on Aragón (they aimed to isolate Catalonia). In December 1937, the Battle of Teruel resulted in a nationalist victory.

## Republican defeat (October 1938 - April 1939)
The insurgents took Vinaroz (Valencia) in April 1938, which cut the communication between Catalonia and Valencia, which isolated the Catalonian forces.  
The republicans regained Teruel and launched an offensive that resulted in the largest and bloodiest conflict, the battle of Ebro.  
The insurgents launched a largescale attack against Catalonia in December 1938. Thousands of people had to go into exile to the south of France at the beginning of 1939. This led to the fall of Madrid and Valencia.    
In the end of March 19939, the republicans surrendered unconditionally. A last war dispatch was sent in 1 April 1939 signed by Franco, which announced the nationalist victory and the end of the war.

# Consequences
The consequences were dramatic:
- Social: the Franco regime led to the ideological polarizations of the "two Spains". Culture and art sharply declined due to the exile of many intellectuals and censorship.
- Economic: it severely affected the Spanish economy (debts, war reparations) and infrastructure, which affected the postwar regime and caused famines.
- Political: the republic was replaced by the dictatorship of Francisco Franco (both Mola and Sanjurjo died during the war). It was a regime with fascist characteristics (emphasized Spain's past of the Catholic Monarchs, authoritarianism, etc.) which systematically repressed anyone suspected of republican.
- Demographic:
    - Between 350.000 and 500.000 casualties. Many died as a result of assassinations carried out by the other side. 
    - Around 500.000 people fled to refugee camps in France and Mexico.