# Causes
Great instability and socio-political problems led to the Second World War:
- The Great Depression:
    - Allowed the Soviet Union to strengthen communist ideals during the capitalist crisis.
    - It led to social polarization between communists and fascists.
    - Its devastating effects in Germany led to the rise of Nazism. Germany also looked in its east for raw materials and markets.
- Rise of totalitarianism:
    - Militarism and rearmament:
        - The Treaty of Versailles was dismissed. The Wehrmacht, the Luftwaffe and the Kriegsmarine were created. The Rhineland was reoccupied.
        - The Spanish Civil War allowed the German to improve their tactics and weaponry.
        - Democracies also militarized due to a rising fear of an upcoming conflict.
    - Expansionism and imperialism:
        - Italy claimed territories in Africa (Ethiopia) and the Balkans (from which already annexed Albania) for control over the Adriatic Sea.
        - Germany's main aim was Eastern Europe (living space and hatred towards Slavs). Alsace-Lorraine, Saarland, Austria and Poland were disputed.
        - Japan prioritized the conquest of China (Manchuria) and other territories in their south due to their population and lack of resources.
        - The USSR looked for its expansion in the east.

# Fighting Blocs

## The Axis Powers
Started from the Pact of Steel (1939) between Italy and Germany.  
They shared many ideological ideas but mainly their hostility towards the same enemies. They were formed of:
- Imperial Japan.
- Nazi Germany.
- Fascist Italy.

## The Allies
Originated from the Allies of the First World War. They were formed by many countries, but they were led by:
- Free France, during the Phony War and after its liberation.
- Great Britain and Commonwealth nations.
- The USSR, after the German invasion of Operation Barbarossa.
- The United States of America, after the Pearl Harbor bombing (before which it had been providing supplies to the Allies).
- China.

# Phases

## Immediate precedents
Nazi Germany had been claiming and invading territories:
- Austria in 1938. They were annexed without resistance.
- Sudetenland (area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly German population) later in 1938. The conference of Munich (1938) was held, in which France and Great Britain allowed Hitler to annex it under the condition he would not invade the rest of Czechoslovakia.
- The appeasement was not successful, as Czechoslovakia was invaded later.

As Germany knew that it could not fight on two fronts, the Molotov-Ribbentrop (August 1939) pact was signed, in which a non-aggression agreement was made with the USSR (despite their opposing ideologies). They also allied to conquer and divide Poland.  
Hitler claimed the Danzig corridor (Polish territory that divided Germany into two). Poland refused and both Great Britain and France threatened to declare war if Germany invaded Poland.  
On 1 September of 1939, Hitler invaded Poland and it was divided with the USSR. Two days later, France and Great Britain declared war.

## Phony War (September 1939 - May 1940)
The French and the British held mostly defensive positions in the western front, as they wanted a repetition of the Great War.  
They decided instead to focus on the north, as Sweden was supplying the Third Reich with steel. The Allies occupied Norway and intended to reach Sweden under the excuse of helping Finland, which was being attacked by the USSR. Hitler realized what the Allies were trying, and invaded Denmark and Norway to secure its supplies and to surround the British isles.

## Axis dominance (May 1940 - December 1941)
The little activity produced in the Phony War allowed Hitler to prepare his troops in the Western Front and start the Battle of France (May-June 1940):
1. It used the same strategy from the Great War of invading Belgium and the Netherlands (neutral countries) to avoid the French fortifications in the frontiers. However, Hitler used a new strategy to avoid a repetition of trench warfare: Blitzkrieg, which consisted in rapid attacks with the combined effort of infantry, aircraft, and tanks to break through and overwhelm enemy defenses.
2. French and British troops were trapped and were captured or forced to escape to England.
3. The rest of France quickly fell after. A Nazi puppet state (Vichy France, led by Marshal Pétain) was established and most of its colonies were acquired.

After the fall of France, the Battle of Britain began:
1. The Luftwaffe started to bomb British coasts and strategic spots to prepare for an attack. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill mobilized Britain and their colonies.
2. The outnumbered Royal Air Force (RAF) successfully repelled the Luftwaffe, confirming British superiority in the channel.
3. Since an invasion was not possible, Hitler ordered frequent raid attacks on British cities during the rest of the war in an attempt to damage their morale and make them sue for peace.

The USSR forced Finland to sign a peace and annexed several minor territories.  
Italy decided to attack in Africa and Ethiopia. The Italian army suffered defeats against the Allied forces and had to rely on the help of Germany.
- Africa Korps, led by General Rommel, arrived in early 1941 and started a campaign in northern Africa with the intention of capturing Egypt and control the Suez Canal to block their supplies.
- The Balkans were gradually invaded. Greece was captured in April 1941.

Knowing he had protected all his fronts, Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa in June 1941. The largest ground invasion in history was carried out against the Soviet Union, which did not expect the attack. Blitzkrieg and lack of Soviet coordination allowed the Wehrmacht to make staggering progress, reaching as far as Moscow and Leningrad (Saint Petersburg). However, the Soviets managed to resist until the arrival of winter, which stopped and weakened the Germans and eventually turned the tides.  
Japan extended its influence in Southeast Asia and China. It decided to launch a surprise attack in Pearl Harbor (Hawaii) in December 1941 to damage US naval ships before invading European colonies (the US fleet had a clear advantage over the Japanese). As a result, the US entered the war.

## Allied counteroffensive (December 1941 - June 1944)
The Battle of Stalingrad began in June 1942. The capture of the city was vital to encircle the Soviet territory in the Caucasus, which was rich in oil (a resource that Nazi Germany lacked due to its blitzkrieg tactics). It was one of the bloodiest battles. The Soviets fiercely defended the city, which gave the country time to increase industrial effort in the factories (which were moved to the east) to expand its army. This allowed the Soviets to fight the German back to Berlin.  
The US intensified bombings in the main German cities.  
The Battle of El Alamein in 1942 resulted in an Allied victory. The arrival of more Allied troops forced the Axis out of Africa.  
In the Pacific Theater, Japan started to lose territories against the British and the US. The US army's progress was very slow, due to intense resistance and the use of amphibious landings. A series of victories in 1942 in the Coral Sea, Midway and Guadalcanal stopped Japan's advance towards Australia.  
In 1943, US and British troops arrived in Sicily and liberated southern Italy. Realizing war was on their mainland, the Italian people stopped supporting Mussolini, who was overthrown and imprisoned. Knowing the Italians would sue for peace, Nazis sent reinforcements and disarmed the Italian army. They freed Mussolini and he founded a Nazi puppet state, the Italian Social Republic.  
On 6 June 1944, the Normandy landings (or D-Day) took place. They consisted in a largescale amphibian invasion of more than 150.000 American, Canadian and British soldiers in Normandy (Northern France) with the aim of allowing more Allied troops to cross the English Channel to fight in the western front. During the previous years, heavy industrialization took place and General Eisenhower planned the preparations, which were top secret.

## Defeat of the Axis
The Normandy Landings allowed the Allies to liberate France, Belgium and the Netherlands:
- On 24 August 1944, the 9th Company division or La Nueve, under General Philippe Leclerc, entered Paris. It was mostly composed of exiled Spanish republicans.
- By Autumn, the Allies reached the Rhine.
- The Germans suffered a series of defeats and had to retreat.
- Air raids intensified in German cities, many of which were destroyed.
- Hitler tried to contain the army and started to use new technologies, such as V-2 rockets, with the hopes of changing the tides of the war.

At the same time, the Red Army advanced through the east. After summer 1944, Soviets controlled Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania. In Yugoslavia, partisan fighters led by Josip Broz Tito liberated Belgrade.  
In 1944, US troops gained ground towards the Japanese mainland, led by General Douglas MacArthur. The Marshall islands, Burma, New Guinea and the Philippines were liberated. In spring 1945, the US captured some islands, such as Iwo Jima and Okinawa, while air raids in Tokyo intensified. The Japanese resistance was fierce (it was commonly believed that dying in battle was the most honorable action), which led to a high number of casualties and kamikaze attacks.    
In April 1945, Allied forces advanced through northern Italy. Realizing the war was lost, Mussolini tried to flee to Switzerland, but he was captured and executed by a group of partisans. Soon afterward, Hitler committed suicide in his bunker in Berlin, hours before the Soviets entered the city.  
In May 1945, Germany surrendered unconditionally.  
To avoid a lengthy and bloody invasion of Japan (and show off power to the USSR), US President Harry S. Truman ordered atomic bombs to be dropped on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. The bombs destroyed the cities and killed 240.000 people. With the destruction and the declaration of war of the USSR, Japan surrendered unconditionally.

# Consequences

## Peace treaties
- In 1941, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill signed the Atlantic Charter. This policy defined Allied war and post-war aims.
- The Tehran Conference (Iran, 1943) was met between Roosevelt, Churchill and Joseph Stalin, the "Big Three".
- The Yalta Conference (Ukraine, February 1945) was met between the "Big Three" and several aspects were discussed:
    - Peace process.
    - New world order.
    - Trials of Nazi leaders.
    - The establishing of the United Nations (UN) and the concept of crimes against humanity.
    - Democratic elections in all European countries (rigged by Stalin).
- The last peace conference was held in Potsdam (Germany) in July-August 1945. Roosevelt, who had died, was replaced by Harry S. Truman. Germany was divided. The rivalry between the USSR and the US became clear.

## Human and material losses
The state of all-out war meant that opposing sides used all their resources in an attempt to defeat each other, leading to high losses:
- Between 50 and 80 million people died. More than 30 were civilians.
- More than 30 million were injured and 3 million people disappeared.
- Millions of people in Europe and Asia were deported or evacuated.
- The Holocaust or Shoah:
    - It was part of Nazi "final solution" to "clean the Aryan population".
    - 5-6 million European Jews were executed in extermination camps such as Auschwitz.
    - Many other ethnic, religious minorities, as well as dissidents of the Third Reich and the mentally or physically impaired.
    - It was done in secret in remote places of Eastern Europe to avoid damaging the image of Hitler. Images of the Holocaust were made public after the Allies liberated them.
- Millions of houses, factories, as well as infrastructure and farmland, were destroyed.
    - Cities such as Hamburg, Dresden, Berlin, Coventry and London were severely damaged.
    - The process of rebuilding took several years.

## Political and territorial changes
- The United Nations was founded. Its aim was to keep peace and solve the world's problems through diplomacy. It had been given more powers to avoid what happened with the League of Nations.
- It led to the decline of Europe's political and economic status.
- The world was controlled by 2 superpowers, which would try to expand their sphere of influence, starting the Cold War:
    - The USSR (Communism): it was the main victor of the war (The Red Army defeated 2/3 of the Wehrmacht). Its popularity and influence grew. Its Five Years Plans gave it a modernized and powerful industry and military power.
    - The US (Capitalism): its industry and economy was barely affected since its mainland was not attacked.
    - Germany was divided into 4 areas between France, Great Britain, the US, and the USSR. Berlin and Austria were divided as well. This was the main focus of the territorial and ideological division between the Communist and Western blocs.

## Social
A moral debate was generated:
- Atrocities committed in the war created juridical concepts such as crimes against humanity:
    - Genocides such as the Holocaust and the ones carried out by the Japanese against the Chinese.
    - Use of atomic bombs.
    - Bombing of civilian targets.
    - Abuse of population in conquered areas, such as the rape of German women in Berlin by Soviet soldiers.
- Many captured Nazi leaders were tried in the Nuremberg trials (1945-1946). Many were sentenced to life imprisonment or death, as the tribunal wanted to make an example of the accused.

## Technological
New technologies were developed during the war, some of which were:
- Computers, first used to decipher German codes to avoid U-boats from sinking US supplies to Great Britain. The creator of modern computer technology is considered to be Alan Turing.
- Missiles, vital during the Cold War.
- Jet planes.