Nucleic acids are biomolecules responsible for storing genetic material.

# Structure
They are formed of nucleotides, which are small unites made up of:
- A nitrogenous base: which can be adenine (A), thymine (T), uracil (U), guanine (G) or cytosine (C).
    - In DNA, adenine matches with thymine(A-T) while guanine matches with cytosine (C-G).
    - In RNA, thymine is replaced with uracil.
- A peniose sugar, or pentose, which can be ribose or deoxyribose. It acts as a base.
- At least one phosphate group, which connects it to other nucleic acids.

These nucleotides stack on top of each other to form large strands (nucleic acids).

# Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
James Watson and Francis Crick, building on the research of Maurice Wilkins, Rosalind Franklin and Raymond Gosling, proposed a 3D model of the structure of DNA molecules.  
They make up the chromatin with the proteins and they are the genetic material that is given to daughter cells. They are only present in the nucleus (when the cell is not dividing), the mitochondria and the chloroplasts.  
They are formed of two complementary strands of nucleic acids. The nitrogenous bases of the nucleotides are connected into complementary bases by hydrogen bonds, giving it stability. When adenine matches with thymine, there are 2 bonds, when guanine matches with cytosine, there are 3 bonds.  
They are connected in a double helix, which coils to the right, forming a spiral staircase.  
The two complementary strands are antiparallel, meaning that they coil to opposite directions. The direction is either 5' or 3'. One strand will go from 5' to 3' and its complementary strand will go from 3' to 5'. 5' and 3' directions depend on the direction of the sugar bases.
The sugars in the nucleotides of DNA are deoxyribose.

# Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
Years later, Friedrich Miescher described RNA, which he called nuclein.  
RNA has several functions in the cell and it is present in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm.  
It is composed by a single strand and thymine is replaced by uracil, which has similar characteristics.  
There are 3 types:
- mRNA: It is a copy of the DNA, which exits the nucleus and transports the information of the DNA to the ribosomes to produce proteins.
- tRNA: Small molecule that transports and adds the right amino acids to the protein that is being synthesized. It translates mRNA code into aminoacid code.
- rRNA: combines with different proteins to form the structure of ribosomes (subunits).

# Differences between DNA and RNA
Structure:
- DNA is formed by a double helix with 2 complementary strands.
- RNA is formed by a single strand of nucleotides.

Nitrogenous bases:
- DNA has adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine.
- RNA has adenine, uracil, guanine, and cytosine.

Location:
- DNA is found in chloroplasts, mitochondria and the nucleus.
- RNA is found in the cytoplasm, the nucleus and ribosomes.

Sugars:
- DNA has deoxyribose sugars.
- RNA has ribose sugars.

Function:
- DNA stores and transmits the genetic information.
- RNA transmits genetic information and uses it for protein production.
