Observation that nucleic acids and proteins are long polymers led a search for a relationship between the linear order of nucleotides and the sequence of amino acids. This led to the development of the central dogma of molecular biology.  
It is divided by 3 processes, in which DNA is duplicated (replication), transmitted into RNA (transcription), and used to produce proteins (translation).

# Replication
Process by which DNA molecules are duplicated into identical copies in the S phase.  
It is a semiconservative model, as 1 strand comes from the parent DNA (parent strand) and one is synthesized (new strand).
1. The 2 complementary strands are separated and divided. Each strand will act as a template for the new complementary strands.
2. Complementary nucleotides are added to the template strands. As the template strands are antiparallel to each other, the nucleotides cannot be added in the same way. The replicases in the leading strand (5' to 3') can easily add the nucleotides (5' to 3' in the opposite direction). However, in the lagging strand (3' to 5'), the replicases have to add them by segments, creating fragments known as Okozaki fragments.
3. 2 nuclear acids are created, each with a double helix of complementary strands.

This process is possible thanks to:
- Helicase: enzyme that separates the 2 strands of the parent DNA.
- Topoisomerase: enzyme that alleviates the tension in the parent DNA.
- DNA polymerase: enzyme that joins the nucleotides to form the new strands. They can only add nucleotides from 5' to 3'. They are also known as replicases.
- SSB (single stranded binding) proteins: they are not enzymes. They attach to the 2 strands of the parent DNA to ensure that they do not rejoin.
- Primase: they mark where the replicases start adding nucleotides. Only one mark (primer) is needed for the leading strand, while several are needed for the leading strand (because the DNA polymerase needs to move from 5' to 3', so it needs another mark for the next fragment). Primers are composed of RNA, so their base has to be replaced.
- Ligase: they join the the Okazaki fragments together. They also replace the RNA bases with DNA bases.

# Transcription
Process by which information in the DNA strands is transferred as mRNA.  
This allows for the genetic information to exit the nucleus so it can be received by the ribosomes and therefore, produce proteins.  
1. The 2 DNA strands separate. The strand that is going to be copied is called template strand, while its complementary strand is called coding strand (its sequence of bases is the same as of the mRNA).
2. RNA polymerases or transcriptases add nucleotides to the mRNA chain.
3. Once the transcription is done, the mRNA separates and the 2 complementary strands of the DNA rejoin.

# Translation
Process by which a protein is synthesized in ribosomes using the information of the message transcribed in mRNA.  
In genetic code, the mRNA bases are read from a specific point (usually from an AUG codon). There are no gaps between codons and bases are not used twice.  
1. Initiation: mRNA attaches to ribosomes (between the large and small subunits). tRNA molecules (which contain 1 anticodon formed of 3 nitrogenous bases and 1 amino acid) surround the ribosome and search for a matching codon.
2. Elongation: The ribosome moves along the mRNA while the tRNA successively matches with the codons (thanks to the complementarity of codons) and leaves the amino acids, which are joined by peptide bonds.Each amino acid is added to the polypeptide.
3. Termination: The ribosome stops when it finds a codon meaning a stop (UAA, UAG, UGA). There is no tRNA to recognize it, meaning that protein synthesis has finished.

## Genetic code
- In nucleic acids, information is written in a language of 4 letters (A,G,C,T/U, each from a nitrogenous base).
- In human proteins, information is written in a language of 20 letters (each from an amino acid).

Synonymy: It is possible to translate the languages through groups of 3 (codons or triplets), which code for specific amino acids. With 4 letters, there are 2^3=64 different codons, which are keys to the genetic codes.

- E.g. the codon UGG is tryptophan.
- The codon AUG is methionine, which generally means the starting of translation.
- The codons UAA, UAG and UGA mean the end of translation.

The genetic code is universal. This means that the same codon refers to the same amino acid in all organisms. This gives evidence of a single origin of life. It also allows for techniques such as recombinant DNA with human DNA to be used (which can be expressed in most organisms, as distant as bacteria).
