Genetic mutations are alterations in the genetic material. They are due to an error in DNA replication or distribution in cell division. Their consequences vary.  
The genetic variability that enables the evolution of a species by natural selection increases through mutations. These mutations allow more genetic diversity, thus changing the organism's genome over time.

# Chromosome mutations
Alterations in large segments of chromosomes or entire chromosomes, and therefore, many genes.

## Structural mutations
They affect chromosome structure and change its shape and size.
- Deletion: loss of a chromosome segment.
- Duplication: a segment of the chromosome is copied next o the original one.
- Inversion: change of direction of segments. It may include the centromere.
- Translocation: a segment separates from a chromosome and is exchanged with another segment from a non homologous chromosome. 

## Numerical mutations
They affect the number of a chromosome without affecting its structure.
- Euploidy: affects the complete set of chromosomes.
    - Haploidy: the number of chromosomes of the individual matches the number of chromosomes of the species' gametes (n). 
    - Polyploidy: presents more than 2 sets of chromosomes. E.g. triploid (3n), tetraploid (4n). An odd number of sets makes many individuals unable to reproduce, because homologous chromosomes are not properly divided in meiosis.
        - Autoploidy: the chromosome sets come from the same species.
        - Alloploidy: part of the chromosome sets come from another species. 
- Aneuploidy: affects single chromosomes or a specific amount of chromosomes.
    - Nullisomy: a pair of homologous chromosomes are missing.
    - Monosomy: a chromosome is missing from one of the homologous pairs is missing.
    - Trisomy: there is an extra chromosome in a pair of homologous chromosomes.

# Gene mutations
They are small and occasional alterations in the DNA (nucleotides). They are the most common type of mutation ad most of the times they have little to no effect in the phenotype of the individual.  
They can be classified in several ways.
- According to changes:
    - Substitution: a nucleotide or group of nucleotides is replaced by other.
    - Insertion: a nucleotide or group of nucleotides is added.
    - Deletion: a nucleotide or group of nucleotides is removed.
- According to their consequences:
    - Silent: the change in nitrogenous bases do not affect the amino acids produced (usually changes in the third combination of the codon).
    - Missense: the amino acids produced are changed. 
        - Conservative: a similar amino acid is produced.
        - Non conservative: a very different amino acid is produced.
    - Nonsense: changes a codon so it means 'stop' in genetic code, prematurely ending the protein production. 
    - Frameshift: changes a codon so it means 'start' in genetic code. The codon read order is affected.
    - Repeat expansion: DNA sequences are repeated, resulting into duplicate amino acids.

# Genetic disorders
Some genetic mutations might lead to phenotype disorders. Examples are:
- Single gene mutations (e.g. hemophilia and sickle cell anemia).
- Mutations of a combination of several genes (e.g. some types of cancer).
- Alterations in chromosome number (Down's syndrome). 

Inheritance of genetic disorders:
- Non-hereditary: they affect somatic cells, due to the exposure to mutagenic agents. They are usually silent unless cancer-related.
- Hereditary: they affect germ cells. All offspring's cells are affected by the mutations. Some types of cancer are hereditary.

Prevention of genetic disorders is based on genetic screening to verify the existence of a responsible mutation. If found, screening is extended to the closest family members to determine its source. Treatment also starts. 