# Biotechnology and Genetic engineering
Biotechnology is the use of a biological system, derivative, or organism in a technological aspect. It comprises the knowledge and techniques that enable biological systems to be exploited.  
Genetic engineering is the application of biotechnology. It consists of the manipulation and transfer of genes. These methods allow to increase knowledge on genetics, improve biological traits, or to deal with certain diseases.  
These practices have always been subject to moral debate. Bioethics are the sets of moral principles that govern human action on the evolution and development of biological systems. 

# Genetic engineering tools
The main tools used are enzymes, which manipulate genes and the nucleic acids.
- Nucleases: they specialize in cutting.
    - Exonucleases: they cut nucleic acids from one end. They cut them into individual nucleotides.
    - Endonucleases: they cut nucleic acids from an intermediate point. Segments of nucleic acids are obtained.
    - Restriction nucleases or restrictases: they cut nucleic acids in places with specific base sequences (restriction sites). They produce straight cuts (blunt ends) although overhangs (sticky ends) are commonly used to leave some base sequences without their complementary, so they can only join to specific nucleic acids.
- Polymerases: they add nucleotides to a strand, provided there is a template.
- Transferases. they add nucleotides to a strand randomly without a template.
- Ligases: they join to nucleic acids provided the 2 strands are compatible. 

# Genetic engineering techniques

## In Situ Hybridization (ISH)
Hybridization is the process by which 2 complementary strands of nucleic acids join together and form a double helix.  
In situ hybridization consists in locating a specific base sequence with the use of a nucleic acid strand.  
Recently, the use of radiation has been replaced with fluorescence, and the technique is called Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH).

### Needed elements
- Cells whose chromosomes are being investigated.
- Probe: nucleic acids (usually mRNA) that contain the coding sequence of the base sequence to locate (i.e it is complementary). Markers with fluorescence or radiation are attached to them so they can be tracked.

### Process
1. Cells to examine are prepared in metaphase, where chromosomes are more visible. Meanwhile, probes are prepared.
2. Cells and probes are put together.
3. DNA is separated through denaturation.
4. If the base sequence is located in the chromosomes, the probe would attach to it.
5. Through karyotypes, it is possible to detect (or not) the fluorescence/radiation and therefore, the base sequences.

### Purpose
This technique allows to locate specific genes and chromosomes.  
- Mutations can be detected. E.g. If 3 probes are located, the organism has a trisomy. If there is just 1 and it is not located in the homologous chromosomes, it might have nullisomy.  
- Similarly, sex chromosomes can be detected. E.g. For a probe that detects a gene in the X chromosome, if there are 2 located, it is a girl, if there is one, it is a boy.  
- Specific genes can be detected. E.g. If a gene has alleles A and a, and a probe attaches to a, and there is 1 located, organism's genotype might be Aa.  

## Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO)
There are 2 methods by which humans can modify organisms:
- By artificial selection: consists of selecting suitable individuals for breeding, to gradually change their genotype over time. E.g. dogs, cats and many crops.
- By modern techniques in labs: consists of creating transgenic organisms, which have had modified or (usually) foreign genes inserted into their genotype (i.e. genes are not modified directly). They are much faster than artificial selection. E.g. Green Fluorescent Protein.

### Purpose
GMO are used to provide organisms with desirable conditions.  
- Humans have created many different species by artificial selection over the years, such as domesticated animals and plants.  
- Transgenic animals are currently limited to mice. They are used to imitate aspects of human conditions, usually diseases so they can be researched more efficiently.  
- Transgenic plants are used to have desirable properties (resistance to pests, harsh environments, nutrients, etc.). They are created more easily than animals, due to their relative gene flexibility, fast reproduction, and easy maintenance.  

There have been ethical discussions about developing more applications of this technique, such as the further modification of crops and human food.

## DNA Cloning
Involves obtaining many copies of a gene or base sequence.

### Needed materials
- DNA to clone.
- A cloning vector, which is a DNA molecule that is able to express its genes in a cell. They can be:
    - Plasmids, the most common vectors. They are small circular DNA molecules found in some bacteria.
    - Bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria.
- Ligases.
- Restrictases.
- Genes that give antibiotic resistance. They must be inserted into the vector.

### Process with plasmids
1. The DNA to clone and the vectors are cut with the same restrictase, to create a complementary overhang.
2. The DNA and the vectors are joined by ligases, forming recombinant DNA.
3. The plasmids are inserted into bacteria.
4. The bacteria are cultivated in presence of antibiotics, to make sure only the ones with the plasmid survive.
5. Through successive cultures, many copies of the same DNA are obtained (through replication and miosis).

### Purpose
They are usually exploited to make the bacteria express the gene. E.g. Most of the insulin industrially produced are obtained through E. coli with the gene that codes for its protein.  
The DNA might also be extracted from the bacteria, although a PCR is more efficient than this technique to obtain multiple copies of isolated DNA.

## Reproductive Cloning
This technique allows to obtain genetically identical individuals to the original.  
For this process to occur, 3 individuals are needed: a somatic cell donor, an ovule donor and a surrogate mother, all of which must be from the same species.

### Process
1. An ovule is extracted from the female ovule donor. A somatic cell is extracted from the somatic cell donor.
2. The nucleus of both cells are extracted.
3. The nucleus of the somatic cell is inserted into the ovule.
4. The ovule obtains the genetic information of the somatic cell, becoming into a zygote, which is totipotent.
5. The zygote is introduced into the surrogate mother, which develops the new individual.
6. The new individual is genetically identical to the somatic cell donor.

### Purpose
For now, this technique is used for research purposes.  
Widespread use is being discussed, as this technique is specially controversial.

## Therapeutic Cloning
Process by which cells, tissues or entire organs are cloned.  

### Stem cells
Stem cells are cells which can be constantly renewed through mitosis to become other types of cell. There are several levels of potency:
- Totipotent: they can become into any type of cell, including zygote cells. E.g. morula.
- Pluripotent: they can become most type of cells. They cannot become into zygote cells. E.g. embryonic stem cells (ESC).
- Multipotent: they can become into cells from a specific group. E.g. cells that create the nervous system.
- Oligopotent: they can become into a few cell types. E.g. lymphoid cells can become into B and T cells but not red blood cells.
- Unipotent: they can only become into one cell type.

Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent stem cells.
- They are obtained from embryo cells that are 5-6 days old.
- Because they are pluripotent, they can become into most types of cells in the human bodies. This allows them to be used in therapeutic cloning to regenerate tissues.
- Cultivations of these cells can be maintained indefinitely.

Adult stem cells are multipotent stem cells that are found throughout the body after development. They produce a limited amount of cell types compared to ESC, but they are not controversial and their use is widely accepted because they do not require the destruction of an embryo.  

It is possible to obtain pluripotent stem cells without the need of an embryo. These are induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), which can be obtained from somatic cells by altering the Yamanaka factors, a set of 4 genes. These genes code for transcription factors, which reprogram the cell. This way, the cell is no longer specialized and it becomes into a pluripotent cells

### Process
1. The nucleus of the stem cell is replaced by a somatic cell's nucleus of the affected individual, similar to the reproductive cloning.
2. Conditions of the stem cell are changed so it develops into the desired cell. Unlike reproductive cloning, they cannot develop into a full individual (not totipotent).
3. The tissue regenerates with the same genetic information.

### Purpose
This technique is heavily used in medicine to regenerate tissues and organs. Since this process produces cells from genetic information of the individual, chances of a rejection from the recipient are considerably lower. Therefore, this treatment avoids the need of organ transplants.

## Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
Process by which many copies of double-stranded DNA molecules are obtained without the need of bacteria.  

### Materials needed
- DNA to clone.
- Primers, ARN fragments that mark where the DNA polymerase starts to add nucleotides.
- DNA polymerase.
- Nucleotides.

### Process
1. Denaturation: DNA strands are amplified or separated, usually by increasing temperature (95ºC).
2. Annealing: temperature is lowered (55ºC) so primers can be added. The temperature is then increased (72ºC) so polymerases can start adding nucleotides, doubling the number of strands.
3. Elongation: steps 1-2 are repeated until enough copies of DNA are created. The number of copies obtained is 2^n, where n is equal to the number of cycles undertaken.

### Purpose
Any technique that requires many copies of DNA would find it useful, 2 of the main ones include:
- Identification in crime scenes. If a sample is found, many copies of the DNA are needed for investigation. This way, the criminal's genotype can be identified through an electrophoresis (or probes).
- Detection of viruses. This requires a special transcriptase to convert the RNA of the virus into cDNA. If the virus is present, primers would attach to the cDNA and copies would be produced. With enough copies, the cDNA would be more visible, therefore, confirming the existence of the virus in the individual.

## Electrophoresis
Process by which DNA molecules are filtered by size.  
It is based on the acidic properties of DNA, charged negatively.

### Process
1. DNA molecules are placed in a recipient with electrophoresis gel.
2. The opposite side is charged positively, which makes DNA to start moving through the recipient.
3. The viscosity of the gel makes smaller molecules move better.
4. The molecules farther from the positive charge are bigger than the ones that are closer.

### Purpose
It is can be used after a PCR (so molecules are easier to see) to identify correctly the genotype. A restrictase might be used to cut specific genes, This means that molecules would be smaller and would be closer to the positive charge in the case the gene is present.