Reproduction is the process by which living things from a species form new individuals of the same species.  
Cells are fundamental in the process.
- Unicellular organisms: the whole organism divides to create new cells.
- Multicellular organisms: new individuals are formed from a series of divisions.

# Asexual reproduction
Involves only one parent.  
It is simpler, faster and effective.  
There is no genetic variation, which means that a hostile environment may lead to extinction.

## Binary fission
Unicellular (protozoa, bacteria) and present in multicellular organisms (tissues, tumors).  
The mother cell divides into 2 daughter cells.

## Budding
Unicellular (yeast) and multicellular (sponges, cnidarians).  
A bud appears on the surface, which eventually becomes the new individual.

## Multiple fission
Unicellular (protozoa).  
The nucleus divides several times. The nuclei share the cytoplasm.  
Sporulation: the new individuals have a protective casing that delays development until conditions are suitable.

## Fragmentation
Multicellular organisms (starfish, strawberries, potatoes).  
The organism divides into 2 or more parts. Each part will eventually become a new individual.

# Sexual reproduction
Involves 2 parents. The organisms produce specialized sex cells, gametes.
- Monoecious or hermaphrodite: the organism can produce both male and female gametes. It still requires 2 individuals.
- Dioecious or single sexed: each organism can only produce either male or female gametes.

It is more complex and slower.  
It produces genetic variation, which means that the environment naturally selects the individuals with the best qualities.  
Process:
1. Gametogenesis: production of gametes.
2. Fertilization: male and female gametes fuse, producing a zygote.
3. Embryonic development: the zygote divides several times to form a new individual. This phase ends when birth or the seed formation occurs.
4. Postembryonic development: the new individual continues to grow. It is considered as an adult when it has the ability to reproduce.
