The cell cycle is the series of events that undergoes in a cell from its formation until its division.  
Cell division is needed in reproduction, growth and development.

# Cell cycle in eukaryotic cells

## M phase
The cell divides:
- Mitosis/meiosis: division of the nucleus.
- Cytokinesis: division of the cytoplasm.

The nucleus changes in this phase:
- Nucleoli and nuclear membrane disappear.
- Nuclear contents are released into the cytoplasm
- The chromatin condenses itself to form the chromosomes:
    - DNA Packaging:
        - The chromatin fibers line up, facilitating their subsequent separation.
        - The DNA becomes more resistant to breakage
    - Process:
        1. Interphase: chromatin lightly packed and duplicating
        2. Before nuclear division: the chromatin condenses into chromosomes.
        3. During nuclear division: the chromatin is condensed into chromosomes, which are rod-shaped bodies visible under an optical microscope.

## G1 phase
The new cell develops and grows in size.  
It synthesizes proteins and cell components.  
It checks if the conditions are suitable to move to the next phase.

## G0 phase
In case the conditions are not suitable, the cell is stuck in the G1 phase, which is now called G0 phase.  
Some cells , such as neurons, remain in this phase permanently. They change their shape and specialize in a specific function.

## S phase
The cell duplicates the genetic material (DNA) so the 2 daughter cell have the same amount.

## G2 phase
The cell continues to grow and prepares itself for the cell division.  
Cell components are fully synthesized.
