Chromosomes are segments of chromatin which are condensed into rod-shaped bodies during cell division.

# Parts
- Chromatid: half of the chromosome. They are also called sister chromatids because they are identical between each other (duplicated in interphase).
- Arm: part separated by the centrosome. The p arms are the ones that are shorter than the q arms.
- Centrosome: joins the arms.
- Telomeres: ends (furthest from centrosome) of the arms.

# Types
- Metacentric: centrosome is in the middle. q = p
- Submetacentric: centrosome is slightly off. q > p
- Acrocentric: centrosome close to one end. q > p
- Telocentric: centrosome at one end. p = 0

# Number of chromosomes
They are no relations between species.  
Most eukaryotic cells are diploid (2n). This means that each cell has 2 sets of homologous chromosomes. Each set is the haploid number (n), provided by one parent. 
- Homologous chromosomes: diploid organisms have 2 sets of similar chromosomes, which contain similar information for the same purposes. The slight difference is what makes an individual of a species unique.
- Somatic cells (2n) are the ones that are not related to reproduction (tissues, blood, organs, etc).
- Germ cells (2n) are the ones that produce the sex cells, gametes (n).

# Karyotypes
Complete set of chromosomes of a species organized and classified according size (from bigger to smaller).  
Human karyotypes have 46 chromosomes (n=23).  
Sex chromosomes or heterochromosomes: pair of chromosomes different from each other. It also different between sexes.
- Heterogametic male: mammals, insects, some plants. Male has an X and Y chromosomes (X,X) while the female has 2 X chromosomes (X,Y).
- Homogametic male: birds, reptiles, amphibians. Male has 2 W chromosomes (W,W) while the female has an W and Z chromosomes (W,Z).
- Grasshoppers: the male lacks the Y chromosome (X,0).

Giemsa method: the chromosomes are stained into patterns, which allows scientists to classify karyotypes.
- Homologous chromosomes have a similar pattern
- Darker bands are called G-bands.
- The pattern of the bands is related to their chemical composition.
