# Eukaryotic cells

## Mitosis
It is the division of the nucleus.  
It is divided into 4 phases:

### Prophase
The chromatin condensates into chromosomes (each with 2 sister chromatids).  
The centrosomes are duplicated and located at opposite poles.  
The mitotic spindle starts to form. It is formed of microtubules (protein fibres).

### Metaphase
The chromosomes line up at the equator of the cell.  
The mitotic spindle lengthens and starts to pull the sister chromatids.

### Anaphase
The mitotic spindle drags each sister chromatid away at opposite poles.  
The sister chromatids separate and become known as daughter chromatids.

### Telophase
The cytokinesis starts to take place.  
Each sister chromatid arrives at one end and the DNA starts to separate back to chromatin.  
The nuclear membrane starts to appear. The centrosomes remain close to the nucleus.


## Cytokinesis
It is the division of the cytoplasm.  
It happens at the same time of telophase.

### Animals
The contractile ring (a ring of protein filaments) starts to form around the equator of the cell, underneath the membrane.  
The contrctile ring starts to shrink, pinching the membrane and forming a cleavage furrow.  
Eventually, the daughter cells separate, each with their duplicated parts.

### Plants
It is different than animals because of the cell wall.  
Vesicles from the Golgi body join with the mitotic spindle at the equator of the cell.  
The membrane of the vesicles make up the cell wall.  
The contents of the vesicles make up the cell membrane.


# Prokaryotic cells

As prokaryotes have only one molecule of DNA, the genetic material does not suffer alterations.  
The cell duplicates the DNA to ensure both daughter cells receive the same amount.  
The attachment sites of the DNA are at opposite poles.  
The cell membrane and wall shrink, separating the daughter cells.
