For sexual reproduction to occur, the gametes have to be haploid. This is because they will fuse into a zygote, forming a diploid cell, which by multiple mitosises will form a new organism.  
So, to mantain the correct number of chromosomes across species, the germ cells have to halve their number of chromosomes.

# Meiosis
Meiosis is a special type of division in which haploid cells are created from diploid cells. Consists of 2 consecutive divisions and DNA is duplicated first.  
It starts with a single diploid mother cell and ends with 4 haploid daughter cells, which are different from each other.  
It produces genetic variation, as crossing over randomizes the segments of each chromatid, and homologous chromosomes are also distributed randomly. The number of different gametes that can be produced is 2^n.  
It is important because it prevents a species from duplicating its DNA after each generation.

## Fist meiotic division

- Prophase I: the chromosomes attach to their homologous chromosomes. The mitotic spindle starts to form.
    - The crossing over takes place, where segments of each homologous chromosomes are exchanged, forming recombined chromosomes, which leads to genetic variation.
- Metaphase I: the chromosomes line up at the equator of the cell (there are 2 lines). The mitotic spindle lengthens and starts to pull the chromosomes.
- Anaphase I: each chromosome is separated from its homologous chromosomes to opposite poles of the cell.
- Telophase I: each side has a haploid number of chromosomes, but a diploid number of chromatids (therefore a diploid amount of DNA). In some cases, the nucleus starts to form.
    - The first cytokinesis takes place.

## Second meiotic division

- Prophase II: very short, DNA is not duplicated. The mitotic spindle forms.
- Metaphase II: the chromosomes line up at the equator of the cell. The mitotic spindle starts to pull each sister chromatid.
- Anaphase II: the mitotic spindle drags the chromatids to opposite poles.
- Telophase II: each side has a haploid number of chromosomes and chromatids. The second cytokinesis takes place.


# Difference between meiosis and mitosis

## Similarities
They both require the prior duplication of DNA.  
Chromosomes are positioned in a similar way.

## Differences

Mitosis:
- The number of chromosomes remains the same.
- It produces 2 identical daughter cells.
- It is involved in asexual reproduction, tissue growth and cell reproduction.

Meiosis:
- The number of chromosomes is halved.
- It produced 4 different daughter cells.
- It is involved in the formation of sex cells.
