Taxonomy is the science that studies the classification of living things.

# Classification systems
Organisms are classified in mutually exclusive groups.  
- Artificial classification: based on external characteristics that are easily identifiable.
- Natural classification: based on the evolutionary relationship between the species. The organisms share many traits, which were inherited from a common predecessor.

## Taxa
The first modern classification system was created by Carl Linnaeus (System Naturae). A hierarchical classification was proposed.  
Living things were grouped in categories according to their characteristics. They were subgroups, in which differences between species were increasingly greater.  
Living things are classified into a natural system that focuses on evolutionary history.  
Taxon is a group of living things that share common traits. They make up categories organized in a hierarchy. The main taxonomic categories are, in ascending order:
- Species.
- Genus.
- Family.
- Class.
- Order.
- Phylum.
- Kingdom.
- Domain.

# Name of living things
A species is a group of individuals that have similar characteristics and can inbreed to produce a fertile offspring. It is the basic unit of classification for living things. Its name must be unique to avoid naming errors.  
The scientific name of a species is formed by 2 words (binomial nomenclature). It is universal, which means that it does not change from one language to another.
- The name is usually written in italics (underlined when handwritten).
- The first word is the genus, it is written with a capital letter.
- The second word determines the species, it is written in lowercase.

# Phylogenetics
Phylogenetics is the science that studies the evolutionary relationship between species. Graphical representations of them are called phylogenetic trees.  
The Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA), is the most recent living thing from which all organisms that are currently living on Earth have a common descent.  
Usually, living things are grouped into 5 kingdoms, which share a common ancestor:
- Monera.
- Protoctista.
    - Plantae.
    - Animalia.
    - Fungi.

However, this system is not completely accurate. There are several classification systems, based on different kingdoms or domains.