There are several theories that explain the origin of life. The currently accepted hypotheses are panspermia and abiotic synthesis.

# Creationism
They are based on beliefs and superstitions, with many of them including a supreme force creating the species (divine origin).  
Creationists argued that living beings were so complex and perfect that they must be the result of a design made by a higher intelligence instead of random chance.

# Spontaneous generation
Based on the superficial observation of nature. It stated the living organisms came from non-living matter.  
Although living things were known to come from their parents, smaller organisms (larvae, mice) were thought to come from matter such as wheat or meat.  
One of its advocates was Jean-Baptist van Helmont, who described that adult mice could be obtained in 21 days by placing wheat and worn clothes.

# Biogenesis
It refuted spontaneous generation by stating that living things only came from other living things.  
This theory raised questions about how the first living thing originated.  
It was experimentally proved:
- Francesco Redi's experiment: he placed meat into 3 containers (open, sealed, gauze covered). He observed that fly larvae could only be present on the meat of the open container or the gauze, thus concluding that larvae only came from other flies.
- Louis Pasteur's experiment: he proved that biogenesis worked with microorganisms too. Pasteurized broth would become contaminated by coming into contact with the air. He proved that by sealing the container or using a long, S shaped neck the broth would remain clean. This meant that bacteria would not spontaneously appear in the broth.

# Panspermia
It stated that the first living microorganisms (spores) came from an asteroid or comet that impacted on the Earth.  
Evidence can be found in some asteroids, where biomolecules have been found.  
However, this theory does not explain how those organisms originated.

# Abiotic synthesis
Stated that the fist living cells originated from organic molecules.

## Oparin-Haldane
Alexander Oparin and John Haldane proposed a theory in which the fist cells evolved from coacervates, which were isolated spherical systems organized by organic molecules.  
Oparin described the primordial ocean as a "primordial soup", in which complex molecules reacted and eventually produced cells, under the right circumstances.

## Miller-Urey
Stanley Miller and Harold Urey experimentally supported the theory of Oparin and Haldane, by simulating the environment of Earth's primordial conditions (4 billion years ago).
1. A flask with boiling water was connected to a larger flask with the most common gases of the early atmosphere (nitrogen, ammonia, methane, water vapor).
    - The climate and geothermal heat encouraged mass evaporation of the ocean, which resulted in an abundance of clouds.
2. Two 60.000 V electrodes were connected to simulate lightnings and ultraviolet solar radiation (provided energy for the reactions).
    - The abundance of clouds resulted in an abundance of lightnings. At the same time, the lack of oxygen in the atmosphere allowed intense UV radiation. All of this provided the energy necessary for the reactions.
3. The reaction gases mixed with the water vapor and condensed in a U-shaped tube.
    - Rain would be common considering the abundance of clouds.
4. After a week, the water would be cloudy because of the presence of carbon-derived compounds, including simple amino acids.
    - Several reactions allowed complex molecules to form, including organic ones.