# Comparative anatomy
If 2 species shared a common ancestor, they share similarities in their organs.
- Homologous organs: they are similar in their morphology and internal structure, as they share a common descent (it is more recent if the organs are more similar), but have different functions. This shows adaptive divergence, in which organs with a common descent become increasingly differentiated as they acquire different functions. E.g. forelimbs of mammals.
- Analogous organs: they are similar in their external form and function, but have a different internal structure and a different evolutionary origin. This shows adaptive convergence, in which 2 different structures acquire the same form and function despite having different origins. E.g. bats' wings and butterflies' wings.
- Vestigial organs: they are (parts of) organs that have had their size reduced, as their function has been reduced or changed. They explain the phylogenetic relationships with other current species and their common ancestor. According to Darwinism, these organs rarely disappear completely unless they make a clear difference in the survival of the species (creating evolutionary pressure). E.g. human tail bones, flightless birds' wings.

# Embryology
Based on embryonic development of the living things. The more similarities, the closer the phylogenetic relationship is.  
The theory of recapitulation or the biogenetic law states that animal embryos tend to reproduce stages of those of their ancestors.  
In the embryonic development of a species, organs that are not present on the adult but were in their ancestor or phylogenetically related species tend to appear. E.g. tail and pharyngeal arch in humans.

# Paleontology
Fossils are the evidence that species that are currently extinct existed. Older fossils are more different to modern species compared to recent ones.  
- Fossilized species can be organized into phylogenetic sequences to show morphological variations of similar species over time. E.g. phylogenetic sequence of Equidae.
- Intermediate forms are fossils of species that show the traits of 2 species that are classified in different groups, meaning that it was their common ancestor.
- Living fossils are modern species that remained mostly unchanged over millions of years, and are similar to older fossils. E.g. horseshoe crab, gingko, coelacanth fish.

# Biogeography
Continental drifts and other geographical changes impact evolutionary process:
- Close proximity and lack of barriers leads to similar species, while isolation favors diversity and divergence.
- The sooner the organisms were separated, the more differences they have between them.

E.g. Biogeography of large flightless birds, which are only present in the south hemisphere.
- Their common ancestor appeared in Gondwana after Pangea's separation. This meant that it could not cross to Laurasia.
- After Gondwana's separation, each group developed on its own in each continent.
- Since Australia separated sooner, its flightless birds were more different than those in South America or Africa. This is also the reason why the rest of the fauna and flora in Australia is considerably more different than in other continents.

# Biochemistry
All living things share the same type of biomolecules. This explains a common descent.  
Molecular similarity between proteins and nucleic acids of different species determines their phylogenetic relationship. The greater the similarities, the greater evolutionary relationship. E.g. protein cytochrome c, present in mitochondria, in which Macaque monkey's differ by 1 with humans, while it does by 11 in a dog, and 21 in a tuna fish. The protein is the same in chimpanzees.