Evolutionism stated that all living things came from previous ones through successive changes. These changes were gradual and slow.

# Fixism
It defended the immutability of the species (i.e., species do not evolve or change).  
It prevailed until the 19th century. Its main advocate of that century was Cuvier, who argued that fossils came from extinct species as a result of a mass extinction.

# Lamarckism
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck was a French naturalist who started the first evolutionary theory in his book Philosophie Zoologique.  

## Evidence
This theory was based on the study of fossils:
- Lamarck observed that some fossils showed intermediate traits between modern species and older fossils. He concluded that species underwent changes over time.
- He observed that older fossils were less complex than modern species. He stated that living things became increasingly complex over time.

## Principles
- Progress: simple organisms appear through spontaneous generation and gradually transform into others of growing perfection and complexity.
- Adaptation: the effort to achieve perfection is interrupted to adapt to the environment, which creates new needs for the organisms.
    - Law of use and disuse: changes in the environment force individuals to adapt or develop the organs needed for survival. The continued use of an organ results in its growth and development, while the lack of use leads to the deterioration of the organ and its disappearance.
    - Law of the inheritance of acquired traits: the changes produced in the organism are transmitted to the offspring, which continues to use or disuse the organ.

## Problems
Lamarckism was not accepted due to Cuvier's influence and other reasons:
- Spontaneous generation was refuted.
- It was known that genetic material did not change, which meant that the offspring would not be able to inherit the changes produced.
- Some organs do not change even if used.

# Darwinism
Charles Darwin was a British naturalist who studied the fauna in the Galapagos islands and Malaysia. He collected samples of different species and analyzed them. He laid the foundations of evolution in "The Origin of Species".  
Alfred Wallace was another naturalist who equally contributed to his work.

## Evidence
- Artificial selection: there are many morphological differences between domestic animals compared to wild animals. This is because breeders encourage the reproduction of individuals with the desired characteristics. According to Darwinism, nature follows a similar process.
- Absence of intermediate forms: if a species came from another, there would be intermediate forms, which do not exist. This means that modern species did not evolve from each other, but from previous species which are not present today (common ancestors).
- Presence of imperfections: the existence of vestigial organs means that there was not a progress towards perfection. The disuse of those organs results in the reduction of their size until they are not subject to natural selection.

## Principles
It refutes many ideas of Lamarckism, but it does include the law of use and disuse.
- Hereditary variation: individuals of the same species present differences between them, which are hereditary. These differences are due to living conditions or use and disuse of organs. They allow natural selection to act.
- Natural selection: the environment "chooses" the individuals that have the most beneficial traits. As the environment changes, a fight for survival is created. The individuals that have beneficial traits (only for that specific environment) survive for a longer period of time, which means that they have more offspring. Individuals that have traits less suited for survival reproduce less. Over time, traits that suit the environment would be more common than those that are not, as the species changes.
    - If the environment remains unchanged, speciation takes place in isolated populations through natural selection. The accumulation of favorable changes leads to a new species, while members without those traits slowly disappear.
- Sexual selection: there are species whose individuals have traits that damage their survival. Sexual selection complements natural selection, and it states that individuals who have traits that favor reproduction (even though it would hurt its chances of surviving) tend to have more offspring, and therefore, they pass those traits more. E.g. peacock, moose.
- Coevolution: as some species are often related to other species, the changes produced in one of them would subsequently cause changes on the other. E.g. predator-prey or flower-insect.

## Problems
Many of their ideas are still valid, but their work was inconsistent with genetics, as they were mistaken about how variation originated and how it was inherited.

# Main differences between Lamarckism and Darwinism
According to Lamarck, species came from others with a lesser degree of perfection, while Darwinism states that species evolved from a common ancestor as a result of an accumulation of gradual changes.  
Lamarckism's main idea is that the species themselves change to adapt, while Darwinism explains that the environment selects the individuals that will survive and reproduce (therefore evolve) thanks to the already present variation in the species.