# Genetic discoveries

## August Weismann
He was a biologist that experimentally discredited the law of inheritance of acquired traits.  
According to him, organisms were formed of 2 factors:
- Germ plasm: inherited or passed to the offspring.
- Somatic plasm: makes up the body of the organism.

Traits acquired by the organism only affect the somatic plasm, which means that the offspring does not inherit those changes.  
His experiment consisted on cutting the tail of a group of mice during 22 generations. He observed that all offspring had tail.

## Mendel's laws
Austrian monk Gregor Mendel established the laws of inheritance of traits. These were described with discrete variants (no intermediate traits), which contradicted the gradualism Darwin defended.

## Mutationism
Geneticists Thomas Morgan and Hugo de Vries discovered that mutations (random alterations in the genetic material) resulted in hereditary variation.
Mutationism was a new evolutionary model in which natural selection was not important in evolution, which was a result of the random appearance of favorable mutations.

# Neo-Darwinism or Synthetic theory
Theodosius Dobzhansky combined Darwinism and the genetic discoveries, formulating the synthetic theory or neo-Darwinism. It was based on the following principles:
- Inheritance of acquired traits is rejected.
- Individual variations within a species are the result of mutations and recombination. They are inheritable.
- Natural selection acts as a result of the variation by favoring the selected mutations (which are beneficial for the environment), while the rest are eliminated or gradually reduced.
- Evolution is a gradual process by which a population changes, as the proportions are altered each generation according to natural selection.

According to this theory, speciation (process by which a new species is created) follows several steps:
1. Individuals of a species have differences due to mutations.
2. The population is separated (usually by a geographical barrier). The groups cannot mix or reproduce with each other.
3. Natural selections acts differently between the groups, provided the environment is different in each region.
4. The gradual accumulation of genetic differences after millions of years eventually prevents the two groups from breeding with each other, leading to a new species.

This process explains the constant divergence of species and the constant growth of diversity.

# Extinction
Extinction is the result of the disappearance of all the individuals of a species. It might be caused by:
- Inability to survive or adapt a change in the environment.
- A species evolved into another species (or several).

The vast majority of species (some estimations round around 99%) that have inhabited the Earth have become extinct. All species end up becoming extinct, as new species appear.  

## Mass extinctions
Although biodiversity is always increasing, there have been 5 large-scale extinctions that severely damaged it. They were caused by a drastic change in the environment, from which very few managed to survive. Evidence of this can be found in fossils.  
E.g. the mass extinction of the Cretaceous period.
- It is estimated to have wiped out 75% of the Earth's species.
- It is believed to have been due to an asteroid impact, which caused particles to be thrown out into the air, reaching the upper layers of the atmosphere. The blackout did not allow photosynthesis to take place, collapsing the ecosystem.

# Punctuated equilibrium
It was developed by the paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould. Despite being considered as an alternative theory, it accepts most principles of neo-Darwinism.  
According to punctuated equilibrium, most evolutionary changes occur in short bursts with very few intermediate forms, while there are long stable periods without much change called stasis. In these periods, the environment is stable and, therefore, there is no pressure to evolve.  
If the environment changed faster, the changes would also be faster. This explained why many species appeared after a mass extinction.  
Evidence can be found in fossils, many of which presented a lack of transitional forms, which contradicted gradualism. However, there were some fossils that did present many intermediate forms (e.g. Equidae), which led to many scientists to believe that both gradualism and punctuated equilibrium could be accepted.  
It is usually confused with saltationism, a similar theory that stated that new species appear in a single generation.

# Symbiogenesis
Proposed by biologist Lynn Margulis. Unlike Darwinism, where survival is done by competition, evolution is achieved through cooperation.  
She proposed that new genes are acquired by symbiotic merging, and that they are the main source of variation and evolution. She stated that the accumulation of mutations led to the impoverishment and extinction of a species.  
E.g. the genus Convoluta, a sea worm that includes 3 species:
- Convoluta roscoffensis: green and photosynthetic. It assimilates green algae.
- Convoluta paradoxa: brown and photosynthetic. It contains diatoms.
- Convoluta convoluta: colorless and heterotrophic. It has no symbionts.

These worms have different appearances and metabolisms depending on the process of symbiogenesis. The first two have symbionts and are photosynthetic, because they merged photosynthetic algae into their bodies.  
Evidence on vertebrate animals can be found too. 8% of the human genome is formed of viral gene sequences.