Hominization is the evolutionary process of the human traits from their ancestors.  
Humans are currently classified into the following:
- Domain: Eukarya.
- Kingdom: Animalia.
- Phylum: Chordata.
- Subphylum: Vertebrata.
- Class: Mammalia.
- Order: Primates.
- Family: Hominidae (with gorillas, chimpanzees and orangutans).
- Genus: Homo.

# Bipedalism
It is the ability to walk upright on the rear legs.  
It distinguishes humans from most animals.  
The genus Australopithecus was the first hominoids known to be bipedal.  
It believed to be caused by a change in the environment in Africa. As forests turned into savannah grasslands, some primates were forced to leave their life in the trees, and started to walk upright.  
This ability included drastic consequences:
- Allows humans to see farther away, above the grassland.
- Bipedal movement is slower, but consumes less energy, which allow them to cover large distances and to need less food.
- Hips are narrow, with large bones, to support the weight of the body better. This also makes the birth canal narrower, leading to painful labors.
- The upper extremities are shorter and the lower are longer. The hands are free to grab things, which led to the development of opposable thumbs.
- Muscles such as the calves, abdominals, or gluteus are stronger and powerful.
- Enlarged, forward facing feet, which are less flexible, but distribute the weight better and are suitable for bipedalism.
- Double S-shaped spinal column. This caused heavy tension, which tends to lead to back pain.
- The cranium has to be inserted in the base. This led to changes in the larynx, which culminated in the development of the vocal cords.

# Increase in cranial volume
There has been a progressive increase in the cranial volume. While a larger cranium did not necessarily increase intelligence in many cases, it did with humans. As a result, the brain underwent heavy development, which culminated in the use of tools and the development of art.  
One of the direct consequences was the embryonic underdevelopment of the newborns, as their head was too big for the narrow hips resulted from bipedalism. This meant that they needed prolonged attention, which favored socialization and learning.

# Diversification of diet
Humans currently have a parabolic (U-shaped) dental arch with thick enamel. Process:
1. 4.4 millions years ago, hominoids had a thin enamel and a U-shaped arch, which was suitable for fruits and leaves.
2. A change in the environment led to the disappearance of trees. Some hominoids survived by eating tubers, roots and fruit. This was made possible thanks to molars and a thicker enamel.
3. 2.5 millions years ago, some added meat to their diet, as they could hunt with the help of tools. The diversification of diet meant that canines, molars, and premolars were made smaller.

Metabolism of alcohol: humans are able to ingest larger quantities of alcohol. This is because many fruits produced alcohol (after fermentation). Humans who were able to consume these fruits (due to the existence of an enzyme) survived more than those who could not.

# Other changes
- Emigration: competition for resources and the ability to cover large distances (bipedalism) allowed hominoids to colonize other continents.
- Body hair was drastically reduced due to the heat of the savannah.

# Evolutionary history
There are currently two opposing models, based on the evidence that there are both fossils of Homo sapiens and Homo erectus in Asia, Europe and Africa:
- Replacement hypothesis or "Out of Africa" theory: it proposed a single origin of modern humans in Africa, with their subsequent expansion and the subsequent extinction of other Homo (some of which had expanded as well). It is the most accepted theory.
- Multiregional hypothesis: populations of archaic humans expanded through the 3 continents and modern humans evolved from them in a parallel fashion (with multiple transitions). The main problem associated with it is that the chances of the exact same species appearing at the same time are almost non-existent. This model justifies it by involving interbreeding.

# Phylogenetic tree
It is currently not clear, as there is a lack of hominoid fossils, which made their study a difficult task.