# Politics in the 17th century 
- Absolutism: the king had all the powers. It was made possible thanks to a series of reforms and theoretical justifications.
- Parliamentary system: the powers and responsabilities were shared between the monarch and the Parliament (House of Commons and Lords). It was the political system of Great Britain.

Absolutism started to be questioned in the 18th century by enlightened thinkers, which led to the development of new theories.

# Political liberalism 
It was based on John Locke's theory, which states that "All men are by nature free and equal"  
According to his theory, the society gave the sovereignty to the monarch for the general welfare. If the king failed to fullfill it, it was the right and obligation of the people to overthrow him.  
This theory inspired a series of thinkers to create a new system:
- Montesquieu: considered as the father of liberalism. He criticized the accumulation of power in the hands of the monarch and advocated for separation of the judicial, executive and legislative powers.
- Voltaire: he criticized the Church and fought for freedom of religion. Even though he was a despot, he advocated for civil rights and judicial reforms.
- Rosseau: he was the first person to outline the idea of democracy. The developed a system where the sovereignty was in the hands of the nation, instead of the king.

## Characteristics 
- Sovereignty in the hands of the nation.
- Separation of powers.
- Right to vote. Universal/censitarian manhood suffrage.
- Freedom of the press.
- Economic liberalism. Market self regulation.
- Equality before the law.
- All citizens must comply with the law, including the monarch.
- The people had a series of individual rights and freedom.
- Secularization.


# Enlightened despotism 
It was a varaint of absolutism, where the monarchs implemeted top down reforms.  
Many enlightened thinkers worked as ministers for absolutist monarchs. They were in charge of implementing reforms to improve the state's efficiency, boost the economy, spread education and improve the quality of life of the population.  
The monarchs used the idea of Progress to justify the accumulation of power and improve the state's efficiency.  
Liberal principles were persecuted because they would have destroyed the idea of absolutism.

## Reforms 
- Parliaments were no longer called.
- Centralization. Administration was reorganized to reinforce the monarch's power.
- Economic reforms. Improvements in agriculture, trade and craft.
- Regalism. The monarchs took action against the Church.

## Characteristics 
- Sovereignty in the hands of the monarch.
- Accumulation of powers in the hands of the monarch.
- "Everything for the people, nothing by the people".
- Censorship. Manipulation of ideas.
- Economic restrictions. Monopolies.
- Class society, divided into 3 estates.
- The will of the king is law.
- The people had to fullfill the king's orders.
- The Church and the state are linked.
