The Age of Enlightenment brought a series of scientific and technical advances which also boosted each other.  
This was combined with the changes in philosophy and economy to create a series of big changes in science and technology.

# Scientific revolution
- Chemistry: Lavoisier.
- Physics: Celsius and Fahrenheit.
- Biology: Linneaus.
- Electricity: Benjamin Franklin and Volta.

# Agricultural revolution
Thanks to chemical and biological advances from the previous century plus:
- Abandonment of fallow.
- New crops that revitalized the soil and were used as fodder.
- Continuous crop rotation.
- More iron tools and plough horses.
- Manure used as a natural fertilizer.
This meant the demographic revolution. It also affected the industrial revolution, as the demand of iron tools increased.

# Demographic revolution
Thanks to the agricultural revolution, as now the population could grow (more food was available and the diet was more varied).  
This meant that there was a surplus of young people who flocked into the cities (rural exodus) to work in factories, starting the industrial revolution.

# Industrial revolution
Gradual process by which an agriculture-based economy becomes an industry-based one.
Thanks to:
- Previous revolutions.
- Advances in technology and metallurgy.
- Invention of the steam engine.
- Wealthy middle class.
- Accumulation of capital.

Characteristics:
- Appearance of the working class.
- Manual work replaced with workers and machines.
- Use of fossil fuels, mainly coal.
- Increased production of good and the transports for their distribution.

The industrial revolution led to a separation between countries:
- Industrialized or developed.
- Developing.
