The population of Spain grew from 7 to 11 million of people.  
There was a delay in Spain (backwardness). Liberal ideas were persecuted and the industrial revolution arrived considerably late.


# Agriculture
75% of land was owned by the privileged classes:
- Mayorazgos: owned by the nobility. The first son would heir all the land.
- Realengos: owned by the monarch.
- Manos muertas: owned by the Church. It could not be sold.

Enlightened thinkers criticized Mayorazgos and Manos muertas for not being productive.  
Carlos III gave realengo to colonists to make them concerned about agricultural productivity.


# Trade

## Domestic
The bourbons invested in civil engineering projects (all roads centralized to Madrid) and created the position of intendente to organize the economies of the provinces.  
It was not very successful because of the poor conditions of the roads.

## Foreign
Mainly between America. It was not equal, as they exported raw materials (iron, wool) and imported precious metals (silver), tobacco, sugar and cocoa.  
There was a monopoly in the port of Cádiz. Carlos III approved free trade in more ports.  
Also in Europe.


# Industry
The bourbons promoted industry.  
It could not compete with the textile industries in Catalonia.


# Treasury
Census were made to the whole population to calculate how much they could collect in tax. It was made possible thanks to catastros.  
The nobility still did not pay taxes.


# The Enlightenment in Spain
It also had importance. The publication of books was promoted and authors such as Jerónimo Feijoó, were protected.  
Enlightened thinkers were part of the cultural elite. They believed that Spain lacked advances in science with practical use.  
Many advances from the previous century were not popular (heliocentrism).  
Academies were important, such as the Real Academia Española or the Academia de las Bellas Artes. The monarchs were interested in preserving knowledge.  
Expeditions were funded, such as the expedition of Malaspina in South America to collect geographical and botanical data. The Jardín Botánico was created.
