# Allelomorphic genes
Each allelomorphic gene (or allele) is an hereditary factor present in the genotype of an individual.  
Each allele represents a trait.  
In diploid organisms, each allele comes from one parent.
Types:
- Dominant allele (A, B, L): it always manifests in the phenotype of an individual.
- Recessive allele (a, b, l): it only manifests itself when there is a lack of dominant alleles.

# Phenotypic traits
A trait is a possible variant for a characteristic of the phenotype of an individual.

# Types of individuals according to their genotype
- Homozygotes or purebreds (AA, BB, ll): they have 2 of the same alleles for the same trait.
- Heterozygotes or hybrids (Aa, Bb, Ll): they have 2 different alleles for the same trait.

# Genotype and phenotype
- The genotype is the set of genes in an individual.
- The phenotype is the set of genes expressed.
The expression of traits is mainly affected by the genotype, but the relationship of dominance and the environment also affect it.

# Model organisms
They are used by scientists to study genetics:
- Pea plant (Pisum sativum)
    - Used by Mendel
    - Easy to reproduce. Each individual produces many offsprings.
    - Plants self-pollinate. Cross pollinating only occurs when the researcher allows it.
    - Traits are easily distinguishable. There are only 2 alleles for each trait.
- Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
    - Used by Morgan
    - Reproduces constantly, many offsprings are produced.
    - Sex is easy to distinguish.
    - Small number of chromosomes (n=4)
