# Gregor Mendel
Austrian monk that studied the inheritance of traits in Pisum sativum in the 19th century.  
He rejected the blending inheritance, which stated that an offspring's phenotype would be an equal mix of the parents' phenotypes.

# Method used
1. Mendel obtained 2 purebreds for contrasting traits (yellow and green peas). He made sure that they would be purebreds by self-pollinating them several times.
2. He crossed the purebreds, known as the parental generation (P x P).
3. He observed the results of the first filial generation (F1).
4. He allowed the F1 generation to self-pollinate, and observed the results of the second filial generation (F2).
5. He repeated the process to obtain a third filial generation (F3).
6. He interpreted the results, and through mathematical and statistical analysis, he demonstrated the existence of hereditary factors and their relevance in the expression of traits.

# First law: Uniformity of hybrids
"For 2 pure-breeding individuals for 2 contrasting traits, the offspring will always express the dominant trait"  
Mendel observed that the F1 generation was homogeneous, i.e, all offspring had yellow peas (expressed the dominant trait).  
As the P generation was composed of purebreds (AA, aa), all the gametes were the same after meiosis (either A or a). When the gametes fused, it produced a hybrid zygote (Aa) that expressed the dominant trait (A).

# Second law: Separation of hybrid traits
"If the F1 generation crossed, the recessive traits hidden will appear in the proportion of 3:1"  
Mendel self-pollinated the F1 generation, but the results were never homogeneous: for every 3 yellow pea plants, there was 1 green.  
After meiosis, half the gametes had the dominant allele (A) and half the recessive (a). Random assortment produced 1 AA, 2 Aa and 1 aa, 3 of them expressed the dominant trait.

# Third law: Random assortment of traits
"All traits are inherited independently of other traits"  
Mendel studied with more than one trait. The F1 generation resulted in yellow and round peas (A, L, dominant). The F2 generation resulted in 4 phenotypes in a proportion of 9:3:3:1 (yellow round, yellow wrinkled, green round, green wrinkled respectively).  
The alleles were present in different chromosomes, therefore, the gametes of the P generation were AL or al (F1 generation had AaLl genotype), and the F1 generation resulted into 4 different gametes (AL, Al, aL, al), 9 different genotypes and 4 different phenotypes.

# Exceptions: Incomplete dominance
The detailed study of these exceptions reaffirmed the laws and improved understanding of genetics.  
It occurs when there is a lack of dominance between the alleles, therefore, the phenotypes blend, resulting in an intermediate hybrid. They are easily distinguishable from purebreds.  
- Four o'clock flower: Red flower purebreds crossed with white flower purebreds produce pink flower purebreds. The F2 generation is composed by a proportion of 1 red, 2 pinks and 1 white.
- Andalusian chicken: Black feather purebreds crossed with white feather purebreds produce grey feather purebreds. The F2 generation is composed by a proportion of 1 black, 2 greys and 1 white.
