# Blood groups
There are many allelic variants, but the main ones are A, B and O (ABO system).  
The O allele is recessive and both A and B are dominant (creating a co-dominance).

## A group
Has A antigens on the surface of its erythrocytes, therefore produces anti-B antibodies.  
It has AA or AO genotype.

## B group
Has B antigens, therefore produces anti-A antibodies.  
It has either BB or BO genotype.

## AB group
Has both A and B antigens, therefore produces no associated antibodies.  
It has AB genotype.

## O group
Has no antigens on the surface of its erythrocytes, therefore produces anti-A and anti-B antibodies.  
It has OO genotype.

# Rhesus factor (Rh)
It is related to the existence of a protein on the surface of erythrocytes.  
It is determined by 2 alleles: R and r, which are dominant and recessive respectively.  
Therefore, there are 2 types of individuals:
- Rh positive (Rh+): have the protein on their red blood cells (RR or Rr genotype).
- Rh negative (Rh-): do not have the protein on their red blood cells (rr genotype). Therefore, they produce antibodies against the protein.

# Sex
It is determined by the sex chromosomes: females are homogametic (XX, oogenesis only results in gametes with X chromosomes) and males are heterogametic (XY, spermatogenesis results in half gametes having an Y chromosome and half X).  
Sex chromosomes are barely homologous (Y is smaller), so they are called heterochromosomes. As most of the sections do not match (and they cannot be exchanged during meiosis), there are sex-linked traits and disorders.
- Color blindness (Daltonism): condition that prevents being able to distinguish between red and green. It is caused by recessive alleles in a region of the X chromosome. As there is no recessive counterpart in the Y chromosome, it always manifests in men, but only on homozygotic women.
- Haemophilia: condition that prevents blood from clotting on wounds. 2/3 are caused by recessive alleles in the non-homologous region of the X chromosome, similar to color blindness.
