# Basic information
From the last quarter of the 19th century, European powers competed for the control of new territories.  
There were different types of colonial government, depending on the degree of organization of the indigenous' population: colonies, protectorates, mandates and dominions.  
Mother country refers to the imperialist state on which a colony depended. It held all aspects of power (political, social, economic, cultural).

# Causes of imperialism
- Capitalist crisis of 1873: until 1890, the capitalist economic system was in crisis. All the following factors will drive the countries to search for new markets where they could sell their products.
    - Industry spread and tough competition: some European countries (France, Germany, Belgium) achieved a very high level of industrialization at the end of the 19th century. This means that the same products were manufactured in several parts, which led to a surplus of goods, which in turn led to a fall of the prices.
    - Fall of businesses and foreign trade: as foreign competition became tough, governments tried to protect the national industry (protectionism) by introducing higher tariffs in the imports. This led to a decline in foreign trade, investments, and therefore, profit.  
    - Fall of the equipment industry: as profits fell, fewer factories were built, which meant that demand for industry equipment (machinery, railways) also declined.
    - Speculation and financial bubbles: during the previous years, governments financed industrial development through subsidies. This means that most of the equipment was produced without real demand. When subsidies ended, many companies went bankrupt. This had an impact on banks and credit.
- Second Industrial Revolution: it required more rare, exotic materials (e.g oil and rubber). This meant that industries had to search new territories to exploit.
- Migration: due to the high population growth. Colonies had to be created to reduce the density of the population. Many Europeans left the old continent and moved to other places around the world.
- International politics: rivalry and competition was common between the imperialist powers. They wanted more colonies not only for economic reasons (e.g trade, exploitation), but also for political prestige or glory and strategic reasons.
- Ideological factors: Europe wanted to civilize the res of the world. A feeling of racial superiority was common between imperialists. Darwinism had a great influence on this ideology.

# Division of Africa
Until 1880, Africa was only interesting for its colonial outposts.  
Many European powers started to explore and colonize the inlands of the continent, creating rivalries.  
In 1885, Germany (led by Bismarck) organized the Conference of Berlin, where parts of Africa were divided between European powers. However, this was not enough to stop the competition for the territories.
- British Empire:
    - Was already established in South Africa.
    - They took control of Egypt in 1882.
    - The British wanted to create a large belt from North to South (El Cairo to Cape Town), which would be economically very beneficial. The other powers tried to prevent this.
- France:
    - Was already established in Algeria and Segenal.
    - Quickly expanded through the Sahara. They encountered the British (Fashonada incident, Sudan, 1898) and were forced to retreat.
    - They wanted to create a belt from West to East (Atlantic to Red Sea).
    - They ended up controlling most of West Africa, part of Central Africa and Madagascar.
- Germany:
    - It had little territories because of its late unification.
    - They rushed for an East-West belt in South Africa.
    - They ended up controlling Namibia, Tanzania and Cameroon.
- Belgium: King Leopold I controlled Congo as a private property.
- Italy: controlled the closest part to its mainland, Libya.
- Portugal expanded from its old colonial outposts. They controlled Mozambique and Angola.
- Spain also tried to expand, to restore part of its old prestige after the loss of the Disaster of '98. It had an especially bloody war in Morocco.

# Division of Asia
Southern Asia was especially important for European trade. However, European powers started to conquer those territories.
- British Empire:
    - Conquered the entirety of India (the 'jewel in the crown').
    - Tried to control Afghanistan and Persia to avoid Russian expansion (Russians tried to find access to a 'hot' port, the Indian ocean or the Mediterranean).
- France controlled Indochina.
- The Dutch controlled Indonesia.
- Japan quickly militarized during this period and controlled Korea and Taiwan. It had some conflicts with Russia (Russo-Japanese War).
- The united States acquired Philippines.
- China was an independent country, ruled by its ancient emperor and institutions. However, it felt the imperialist pressures.
    1. China was forced to open some ports in Canton and Shanghai to international trade.
    2. The British started an illegal, profitable business by introducing opium in the country.
    3. The Chinese rebelled against this situation in the Opium Wars (1839-1842), which resulted in a defeat.
    4. The Treaty of Nanking (1842) was signed, which forced China to open more ports. The port of Hong Kong became a British royal colony until 1997.
    5. The Chinese unsuccessfully rebelled against foreign control in the Boxer Rebellion (1899-1901).  

# Consequences of imperialism

They were different for the colonized and the mother country:
- Artificial borders:
    - Territories were divided based on the interests of the mother country.
    - The indigenous population was forced to be separated or with other people, which created problems in the future.
- Inequalities in the global production of goods:
    - The colonies produced cheap raw materials.
    - The mother country manufactured and sold industrial products with a higher value.
- Social structure: based on racial discrimination. They destroyed traditional tribal society.
    - The colonists were at the social elite.
    - The indigenous population was often affected by racial discrimination.
- Decolonization in the 20th century.
- It was beneficial in some aspects, as many advances in medicine, sanitation, law, administration and technology were introduced.