# Precedents: International relations at the end of the 19th century
The end of the 19th century (known as the Belle Époque) was a period of prosperity and optimism, due to the faith in progress and science. However, it was also a period of tension between powers due to the territorial disputes (Imperialism).

## Bismarckian system (1870-1890)
France wanted revenge for the loss of Alsace-Lorraine (Franco-Prussian War, 1870-1871).  
Because of this, German chancellor Bismarck wanted to isolate France by means of a system of alliances, the Bismarckian system. This allowed for peace during the initial years.

## Armed peace (1890-1914)
Bismarck resigned in 1890, and was replaced by an expansionist Willian II, who was much less diplomatic than Bismarck.  
Furthermore, international tensions between industrialized countries increased, due to a number of factors:
- Russia and Austria rivalized because their expansion towards the Balkans clashed (Russia wanted an access to the Mediterranean Sea). Furthermore, Slavic nations took advantage of the Ottoman Empire's decline, leading to the 2 Balkan Wars. Austria-Hungary saw Serbia as a threat to its political unity, because it promoted Slavic movements.
- Italy and especially Germany (loss of Alsace-Lorraine) feared an attack from France.
- Great Britain was worried about the quick militarization of Germany's battle fleet, which could soon threaten the Royal Navy.
- Italy initially rivalized against France and Great Britain due to their colonies stopping Italian expansion in Africa. However, its rivalry with the Austro-Hungarian Empire (confrontations during the Italian unification) made Italy switch to its previous enemies.
- Colonial expansion was very important for each power, which further contributed to rivalries. Great Britain belt's was stopped by Germany. Germany's by Portugal's and Belgium's, Italy's by French's and British's. Germany was left at a disadvantage against the British and French.

Because of these factors, each power tried to protect its interests by seeking alliances (no diplomatic forums/discussions) 2 diplomatic blocs were created, where each participant country would support the other in case of an attack by the enemy bloc.
- The Triple Alliance (later the Central Powers), 1882: led by Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and Italy. Italy remained neutral at the start of the war and ended up switching sides and declaring war on them. The Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria joined later.
- The Triple Entente (later the Allied Powers): initially led by Great Britain, France and Russia. This meant the end of British neutrality in Europe. Russia was economically helped by Great Britain and France, but it surrendered in 1917 after the Russian Revolutions (Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, March, 1918). Most countries joined this side during the war, leaving the Central Powers at a disadvantage (China, Japan, industrialized powers' colonies, the USA, Brazil, Portugal and Italy).
- Some countries, such as Spain, the Nordic countries, Switzerland, and part of South and Central America remained mostly neutral in the war.

This led to an armed peace or arms race, in which each bloc invested in its military development, by means of the Second Industrial Revolution. They manufactured weapons in an industrial scale and developed new weaponry (gas attacks, armored vehicles, air forces).

# Development of the war (1914-1918)

## Immediate cause (June 1914-August 1914)
In June 28th 1914, the crown prince of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Franz Ferdinand, was assassinated in Sarajevo by a Serbian separatist, Gavrilo Princip (promoting the end of Austrian regime in favor of nationalism). This led to the system of alliances reacting with ultimatums: Austria declared the war on Serbia, Russia (ally of Serbia) on Austria, Germany (ally of Austria) on Russia, France (ally of Russia) on Germany...  
The Belle Époque allowed for peace and affected the people's mindset. The declaration of the war was even celebrated at first, and many volunteered to participate in the war. This was influenced by Patriotism and public opinion. The people thought it was going to be a quick battle, which proved fatal after the first phase.

## First phase: war of movement (1914)
Germany started with a quick attack to dominate France: the Plan Schlieffen. French troops attacked Germany directly while Germany invaded a neutral country (Belgium) to surprise the French from another front. The idea was to dominate the west front before British and Russian troops arrived. The violation of basic principles of war led to Great Britain to declare war on Germany.  
At the same time, Germany and Austria combined forces against Russia on the east. Russia, due to its economic situation, was at a military disadvantage against the other powers.

## Second phase: trench warfare or war of position (1914-1917)
In September 1914, the French stopped the Germans from advancing in the Marne River.  
The battle came to a standstill, where neither sides could advance against the other. This is because to protect themselves from the enemy, complex systems of trenches from the North Sea to Switzerland were created, and death traps were placed. This created two confronted trenches, the German and the Franco-British. They were separated by no man's land, a territory that neither sides occupied because of fear of being attacked or surprised by the enemy. Environmental conditions further contributed to human suffering.  
Because of the trenches and traps, attempts at breaking enemy lines resulted in bloody battles, with terrible losses on both sides.  
Germany started to commit war crimes in an attempt to dominate its enemies, such as civilian attacks and the use of lethal gases. As they did not want to be left at disadvantage, the rest of belligerents would shortly use them afterwards.  
In this period, operations were extended to the colonies and the rest of the world. Many states joined to one side or another one.  
Germany attacked the Lusitania, a British ship carrying American and British passengers. This increased tensions between Germany and the US, which ultimately led to the US declaring war.

## Third phase: end of the war (1917-1918)
The triumph of the Revolution of October 1917 in Russia led to a Revolutionary government, led by Lenin. As he advocated for peace, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed, where Germany would annex a third of the Russian territories and population in exchange of peace. This way, the war ended for Russia.  
The United States joined the side of the Entente and sent troops to fight in Europe.  
Austria and the Ottoman Empire surrendered in 1918, and an uprising in Germany led to an armistice, ending the Great War.

# Consequences of the war

## Political
Paris Peace Treaties (1919-1920): 5 treaties were signed in different palaces around Paris by the defeated powers. They were partly based on the Fourteen Points, petitions made by the US after the war.
- Treaty of Versailles (Germany):
    - Territories:
        - Alsace and Lorraine were returned to France.
        - Territories were ceded to Denmark (Holstein-Schleswig), Poland and Lithuania.
        - Colonies were lost and distributed to Japan (Asia), France and Great Britain as mandates.
    - Demilitarization: especially in the Rhine region (next to French borders). The German army was limited to 100000 men and restrictions on its naval and air force were placed.
    - Economic compensation: Germany was made responsible of the war. It had to pay or compensate most of the damage caused.
- Treaties of Saint German (Austria) and Trianon (Hungary): The Austro-Hungarian Empire disintegrated. Austria was reduced. Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Poland were created.
- Treaties of Sèvres (Ottoman Empire) and Neuilly (Bulgaria): The Ottoman Empire also disintegrated. Iraq, Palestine and Syria were divided between Great Britain and France as mandates.

The leadership of the United States of America: Europe lost hegemony. Because it was the least affected country by the war, the US started to give loans to Europe. President Woodrow Wilson stated the Fourteen Points. They were based on:
- The principle of collective security: the League of Nations was created, whose objective was to search for peace before any confrontation. Although it was relatively weak, it was the precursor of the United Nations.
- The principle of self-determination: ensured freedom and right of self-government. This allowed for nationalist regions to achieve their independence from bigger units (Paris Peace Treaties). A new map of Europe was created.

The conditions imposed, especially the Treaty of Versailles, were seen by the German as a humiliation. The economic crisis of Germany further contributed to a feeling of injustice and revenge, leading to Nazism, the violation of the Treaty of Versailles and the Second World War.

## Social
During the war, female labor force replaced men's. After the war, many women kept their jobs, allowing women to incorporate to the labor world. Women's right to vote was also recognized in many countries. This is one of the causes of the future patriarchy in fascist systems.

## Demographic
More than 10 million soldiers were killed. There were huge numbers of injured and civilian losses. The main powers were the most affected.  
Most deaths were amongst men, which further affected the birth rates in the following years.

## Economic
Economic losses were great. Their impact varied. Demographic consequences led to less people working. Most national resources were already spent on war. Territories and buildings were destroyed.  
France and Belgium were the most affected.  
Germany had a very slow recovery rate because of the economic compensation it had to pay.  
The United States gave loans to European countries as it was barely affected by the war. However, the crash of the New York Stock Exchange and the crisis of 1929 led to the Great Depression. This meant the biggest crisis in the capitalist system, which allowed Communism to grow in influence and caused the Second World War.

## Cultural
It was a period of social unrest.  
Optimism and faith in science and technology ended, because they proved their potential for mass destruction. Many thought about the decline of western civilization.  
Pacifism and Internationalism grew, as well as Militarism.  
Many thought about the end of Capitalism and Imperialism, which allowed Socialism and Communism grew.