# Czarist Russia
At the start of the 20th century, the Russian Empire occupied vast territories and had a population of 150 million people. However, the country was still under the Old Regime:  
- It was governed by the Czar, an autocratic monarchy based on absolutism established by divine right.  
- The Czar was supported by the privileged class: the feudal aristocracy, the Orthodox Church and a corrupt bureaucracy. Part of the social system was still based on feudalism.  
- Its economy was also backward. It was based on economy and the country experienced a delayed industrialization.

However, political opposition started to appear:
- Liberal thought was common between the cultural elite.
- The Russian Social Democratic Worker's Party (RSDWP) was a Marxist-inspired institution. It would grow as the proletariat grew. It soon divided into 2 branches with different ideologies:
    - Bolsheviks: they were true advocators of the Revolution of the Proletariat. However, according to them, there was "no time to lose", so unlike Marx, they prioritized the seizure of power instead of a gradual class consciousness developing process. Their ideologies would soon evolve into Leninism and later to Communism.
    - Mensheviks: they were supporters of a reformist liberalism and democracy.

# Revolution of 1905
In 1905, the Czar Nicholas II was threatened. Some causes of this movement were:
- Severe economic, social and political crises, caused by the inefficiency of the Old Regime.
- The defeat in the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905): Russia wanted to control north-east China to get access to the port to the Sea of Japan. At the same time, Japan was a rapid growing imperialist force. They both clashed over the same territory, causing the war. The fact that Russian forces were unable to defeat the Japanese army severely affected Russia's prestige. Furthermore, people of the worker's class were sent to fight in the army, contributing to social unrest. The people in Russia used this moment of weakness to start the revolution.
- The immediate cause of the Revolution was the Bloody Sunday, where a peaceful protest was silenced by the army in front of the Winter Palace. This event outraged the Russian people.

This was a period of political strikes, popular protests, peasant revolts and military uprisings.  
The first soviet was created in Petrograd to coordinate the revolution. Soviets were urban organizations of workers, peasants and soldiers.  
Revolutionaries did not succeed. Nicholas implemented some liberal reforms to pacify the movement:
- Creation of the Duma, or National Legislative Assembly. This way, liberals had a way to control the Czar, through the legislative power.
- Agrarian reform. There was a redistribution of lands and the privileged class lose part of their lands.
- Limited individual and citizen's rights and liberties.

The rest of the revolutionaries were defeated by the Russian army, which returned from the Russo-Japanese War. After retaking control, Nicholas II reversed some of the reforms made to keep his autocratic control.  
After this period, Russia experienced an increased economic growth, which resulted in a relatively stable and prosper period until 1914.

# Revolution of February 1917
In summer 1914, the Great War started. Russia was forced to participate in favor of the Entente. However, due to its lack of militarization and industrialization, Russia lost many battles against Germany. After the initial losses, Nicholas took direct control of the army in 1915, which did not improve the situation. The war severely worsened the country's economy and soldiers stared to desert.  
In his absence, the Czarina managed the government. It is believed that Rasputin, a member close to the Czar's family, manipulated her to collapse the Russian government. He was suspected of being a German spy.  
The demoralization due to the losses of the war, the decline of the government, the subsistence crisis and the imposition of ration cards caused new demonstrations by workers and women in February 1917. This led to a new revolutionary strike, which was ultimately supported by the Duma, the Soviet and part of the army. The Czar realized that he had no support, and was forced to abdicate.  
Nicholas' abdication left a political space that was filled by 2 powers:
- Duma: they supported a liberal transition.
- Soviet: revolutionaries.

Initially, both parts agreed to cooperate and create a Provisional Government and a Parliament, established with:
- A liberal, democratic political system.
- A constituent assembly.
- Political amnesty, which allowed for Lenin to return.

Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, or Lenin, was a Russian revolutionary that was exiled by the Czar to Zurich (Switzerland) due to his attempts at creating a revolution. However, thanks to the amnesty and the German (they wanted him to cause disorder in Russia and to sign a peace to end the war), Lenin returned from his exile.  
After returning, Lenin led the Bolshevik party. Strongly influenced by Marx, he expressed Bolshevik ideology in the April Theses:
- Rejection of war. Russia had been fighting a war that it could not afford (First World War). Although Bolsheviks were known for their tendency towards violence, Lenin advocated for the end of the Great War for Russia.
- Rejection of the Provisional Government. Lenin refused to cooperate with the Duma and defended the need of a new revolution.
- Establishment of a republic of soviets. Lenin defended the idea of proletarian dictatorship.
- Nationalization of banks and lands. This idea was supported by peasants and workers but was feared by the aristocracy, Church and the bourgeoisie.

He achieved popularity with the mottos "Peace, bread, land" and "All the power for the Soviets". However, many Bolshevik leaders were imprisoned or forced to flee by the Provisional Government.

# Revolution of October 1917
The Provisional Government tried to boost war effort, worsening the economy. This resulted in more demonstrations and strikes, continuing a period of instability.  
Kerensky, the head of the government, entrusted the supreme command of the army to General Kornilov (because of his anti-revolutionary ideas), who tried to overthrow the government and start a military dictatorship. Kerensky had to cooperate with Bolshevik leaders to stop Kornilov.  
Due to the weakness of Kerensky and the increase of popularity of Bolsheviks, Lenin felt that the time had come and an armed uprising started. With the support of the Petrograd Soviet, the Bolsheviks took control of strategic points of Petrograd during the 24th and 25th of October to siege the Winter Palace and force the Provisional Government to surrender. The following day, warning shots from the cruiser Aurora (which threatened to destroy the Winter Palace) announced the triumph of the revolution and the start of a revolutionary Russia.

# First Revolutionary Government
In October 26th, a revolutionary government led by Lenin was formed. It included all the political factions that supported the revolution.  
The Soviet published the first decrees just after the government's formation:
- Decree on peace: it defended Russia's withdrawal from the war. Revolutionary leaders and the German discussed the conditions imposed over Russia. During the discussions, German soldiers started to occupy western Russia, imposing even harsher conditions to the government. Finally, in March 1918, Lenin signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which ended the war for Russia in exchange of important territories (Finland, Poland, Baltic States, Ukraine, and other western territories) and their population. This humiliated the Russian government and relinquished more than a third of the Russian population and wealth. These lost territories would annex to Russia again, forming the western belt of the USSR. 
- Decree on Land: the property of the Crown, Orthodox Church and landowners was confiscated and distributed to local soviets and agrarian committees for division between peasants.

## Problems of the new government
In November 1917, elections by universal suffrage were held to elect a constituent assembly. Lenin expected the Bolsheviks to win. However, they were won by the Socialist Revolutionary party (SR). This resulted in Lenin dissolving the assembly and take power by force.  

While Lenin was implementing many socialist and communist policies, his government started to be compared with a dictatorship, due to the marginalization of the opposition and the oppression of the secret police (Cheka). These were some of the many conflicts that ended up causing the Russian Civil War.

Lenin died in 1924 after a series of strokes. He rivalized against Stalin and tried to ensure he would not take power. However, he failed to do so. Trotsky was chosen by Lenin to continue as the head, but Stalin achieved power and forced him into exile.

## The Russian Civil War (1918-1920)
Bolshevik control was absolute in the industrialized areas and the main cities. However, counterrevolutionaries took control of the vast outlying, underdeveloped areas. The tensions produced in the new government and the oppression led to a civil war. It was a violent period marked by famine, cruelty and disease.  
There were 2 main factors:
- Red Army: consisted of Bolsheviks. Their discipline, industrial advantage, and the military leadership of Trotsky allowed them to win the war.
- White Army: made of the factions opposed to the Bolsheviks, including Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionary Party and liberals. They were supported by the Western powers (including Russia's previous allies, like France and Great Britain), as they wanted to prevent the revolution from spreading, as well as controlling Russian natural resources. The divisions between them, lack of organization and industrial disadvantage made them unable to defeat the Bolsheviks.

### Consequences of the war
Economic: War Communism and birth of authoritarian economic systems. During the war, the government took control of the economy and abolished private property. This proved to be an inefficient system for production after the war (there were times where they had to return to ration cards). As well as the wealthy classes (especially the bourgeoisie), peasants did not support this system, as they had to give back the lands they previously took from the privileged.  

Political:
- The war contributed to the consolidation of the Bolshevik regime.
- Strengthened single party, as the opposition was excluded.
- Lenin defended the spread of communism around the world, giving rise to the Third International or Comintern, with the symbol of the hammer (workers) and the sickle (peasants). This divided the workers in 2 branches:
    - Social Democratic, advocated by the Second International. The purist Marxists defended the proletariat revolution through class consciousness.
    - Communism, advocated by the Third International. Their advocates argued that "there was no time to lose" so class consciousness was replaced by the leadership of a single person, usually a dictator. It also defended a single party system where a strict hierarchy was defined.
- The birth of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) in 1922. This political unit would retake the territories lost in Brest-Litovsk and would help to spread the communist revolution worldwide.