It took place in the reign of Alfonso XIII (1885-1933). He came of age at 16 years old (1902), ending the regency of his mother.  
The elitist political system of the Restoration created by Cánovas del Castillo (turnismo) was in crisis, as a modern urban society (middle classes and proletariat included) developed. This created tensions and contributed to the widespread instabilities and crises of this period.

# Regenerationism
The disaster of '98 meant the loss of the final colonies of Spain (Cuba, Puerto Rico, Philippines) and with them, the Spanish prestige and political credibility, as more people started to criticize the system.  
This allowed the emergence of an intellectual and political movement called Regenerationism. The main focus of this movement was to look for causes of the Spanish decadence and called for reforms. Its advocates defended the end of electoral fraud and manipulation, and the modernizing and Europeanizing of Spain.  
This started a process of reforms by the governments of Maura (Conservative, replaced Cánovas del Castillo, who was assassinated in 1897) and Canalejas (Liberal, replaced Sagasta, who died in 1903). These leaders had limited control over their parties, but they passed laws to improve the situation.  
However, improving the regime was difficult because of corruption, divided parties, social tension, the assassination of Canalejas (1812) and the Tragic Week.

# Growth of political opposition 
The opposition started to organize and strengthen:
- Nationalisms: 
    - Catalonia: the Lliga Regionalista was created in 1901, which was supported by the bourgeoisie, eradicated caciquismo from Catalonia and became the main Catalonian party. Its most important leader, Francesc Cambó, created the Mancomunidad, which united the 4 Catalan provinces in the same institution.
    - There were nationalisms in the Basque country (PNV) and Galicia, but they were less relevant.
- Republicanism was the main opposition. They received support from many intellectuals. However, they were still divided. They later joined with the PSOE.
- Socialists started to work within the system, through the PSOE. Pablo Iglesias managed to be the first socialist member of parliament in Spain. they acquired more importance as the proletariat grew.
- Anarchism was also widespread, especially in Catalonia and the lands of the south. The CNT trade union was created in 1910. 

<!-- Este apartado no viene en los apuntes y puede no ser necesario -->
# Tragic Week (1909)
Spain was initially marginalized in the division of African territories, but was later granted Morocco from France.  
This was seen as an opportunity to regain some of the prestige lost in the disaster of '98 and the government sent the army to the new Morocco protectorate. However, the conquest of Morocco was harder than the army expected, due to the guerrilla tactics of the indigenous population, the inadequacies of the Spanish army and the technical difficulties of the terrain.
The Tragic Week took place in Barcelona, 1909. Many workers were being sent to Africa in an attempt to conquer Morocco. As a result, many people, especially workers, protested this policy, causing a general strike and widespread violence. This was harshly repressed by the army, causing social tensions and political polarization.  

# Crisis of 1917

## Precedents
Spain did not enter the Great War. As a result of this neutrality, the Spanish economy flourished by producing and exporting products to the forces of the Triple Entente. This reactivated the industry, causing an increase in the prices of basic goods and profit.  
However, while the owners of the means of production were benefited, the workers were under even harsher conditions. This created a condition of social unrest, which, combined with other factors, exploded in the crisis of 1917.

## Factors and development
- Worker's movements, a general strike started. They were especially common in Catalonia: 
    - The triumph of the October Revolution of 1917 in Russia gave high expectations for the working class, who tried to achieve something similar, causing a period of violence called the Bolshevik Triennium (1917-1920).
    - Owners wanted to eliminate the leaders of trade unions and these movements, with pistolerismo, i.e., by hiring assassins to get rid of them. The workers responded with the same pistolerismo strategy.
- Political:
    - The Catalan issue worsened.
    - The parties had to resort to coalition or national unity governments. However, they did not last long, so they looked for authoritarian measures.
    - 
- Military:
    - They controlled the worker's movements by using very repressive measures such as the ley de fugas.
    - The army was in poor conditions, so soldiers demanded better wages and a better organization of the army.
    - The army also got involved again in politics.
    - The problem of Morocco worsened, as they encountered tough resistance. This culminated in the Disaster of Annual of 1921, in which the Spanish army received 13000 casualties, with huge material and territory losses. A whole investigation started in the Parliament and demanded the government and the king to accept the responsibility of the disaster.

## Consequences
The crisis left a climate of violence and political opposition.  
This opportunity was used by the army to stage a coup d'etat against the government. It was led by the future dictator, Miguel Primo de Rivera.