# Silver age of Spanish culture
Spanish thinking, literature, culture and art flourished during late 19th and the start of the 20th century. Huge contributions to the world culture were made.  

## Culture

### Generation of '98
It was a group of intellectuals affected by the Disaster of '98.  
They criticized the country's backwardness and the political regime.  
The authors were initially left-wing advocates, but their ideologies changed over time.  
Important authors were Baroja, Unamuno, Valle-Inclán, Machado, Azorín, and Maeztu.

### The Renovadores
They were centered around Ortega y Gasset and the Revista de Occidente.  
During this period, institutions were created, which trained young researchers in all fields:
- Junta de Ampliación de Estudios.
- Residencia de Estudiantes: created by the Junta de Ampliación de Estudios in 1910 based on the ideas of the Institución Libre de Enseñanza. It was a cultural center that complemented the university. Important figures such as Azorín, Dalí, Buñuel and Lorca stayed there. It has been located at the Colina de los Chopos (Madrid) since 1915.
- Residencia de Señoritas.

It gave rise to important figures such as Ramón and Cajal (Nobel prize in medicine in 1906), Juan Ramón Jiménez and Manuel Azaña.

### Generation of '27
They were an outstanding group of poets. They were known as the Group of '27 because they gathered in the commemoration of the death of Góngora.  
Important poets were: Lorca, Salinas, Ramón Jiménez, Salinas, Alberti, Cernuda and Miguel Hernández.

## Art
Many artists achieved international fame.  
- Painting:
    - There were some conventional painters influenced by the previous movements (costumbrista).
    - The most famous one were experimental, avant-garde artists, such as Picasso, Miró, Dalí and Gris.
- Sculpture: there was also conventional and modern art.
- Music: important musicians were Isaac Albéniz and Manuel de Falla.
- Filmmaking: Luis Buñuel was an important artist.
- Architecture evolved as well, but Rationalism and Functionalism was not very influential.

# The Avant-gardes
They were a group of movements developed in the first third of the 20th century.  
Avant-gardes focused on the breakage of the traditional and conventional art. They wanted to innovate, modernize, experiment.   
They expressed new realities of the scientific/technological advances and the new socioeconomic conditions of mass society.

## Cubism
It used geometric figures, from different angles in a single plane. This way, it broke with the traditional laws of perspective. The foreground and background was blended in an bidimensional plane.  
It was born in France, after the exhibition of the Young Ladies of Avignon (1907). It influenced many movements.  
Important artists were: Pablo Picasso, George Braque and Juan Gris.

## Dadaism or the Dada movement
It was born in Zurich, Switzerland, during the Great War. It emerged as a means to stop the war, break expectations, or challenge authority or political ideology. Human culture was questionned.  
They used a provocative art style, based mainly on the readymade philosophy, with which they created new meanings from an object. It innovated through absurdity, randomness, chaos, mockery, destruction and disgust.  
Important artists were: Marcel Duchamp, Man Ray, and Tristan Tzara.

## Surrealism
It focused on the world of unconsciousness and dreams, described by Freud. It avoided everyday reality. Rationalism was denied. Artists painted in a hyper-realistic or automated way.  
It was started by Breton, in France, 1924. It influenced many movements.  
Important artists were: René Magritte, Max Ernst, Salvador Dalí, and Joan Miró.

## Expressionism
It was originated in Germany as an increase of anxiety about human authenticity and spiritually, and later, the horrors of the Great War.  
They used pure, intense colors with violent contrasts and brushstrokes.  
Important artists were: Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, George Grosz, Otto Dix, and Edvard Munch.

## Abstract art
Abstract art gained influence at the start of the 20th century. It became very broad and influenced many movements.  
It was the opposite of figurative art, which means that it did not try to imitate external reality, but it proposed a new reality through color and abstract or geometric forms and shapes. It focused on the visual and spiritual values of art itself.  
Important artists were: Wassily Kandinsky, Piet Mondrian, and Paul Klee.

## The Bauhaus
The Bauhaus was an institution founded in Germany (1919) by Walter Gropius. He defended the "total work of art", in which all arts formed an essential unit.  
Its teachings and its ideas spread globally.  
It was closed by the Nazis, who considered it subversive.

# Russian art

## First Avant-gardes (1900-1914)
Russian artists were initially very related to the development of Avant-garde movements.  
They tried to find a balance between the innovation and Russian values. Important Avant-garde schools were born (abstract, fantasy, expressionist).  
Important artists were: Kandinsky and Marc Chagall.

## Abstraction (1914-1920)
Rayonism and Suprematism were movements that went deeper into abstraction. They were based on simple geometric shapes (triangle, circle, square).  
Important artists were: Mikhail Larionov, Natalia Goncharova and Kazimir Malevich.

## Constructivism (1920-1934)
The triumph of the revolution needed to create proletarian art to instruct the nation and give example. Many artists liked the idea of contributing towards world change, while others were disgusted with the subordination to the political power.  
This movement worked in many fields: architecture, industrial design, typography, posters...  
Important artists were: Vladimir Tatlin, Alexander Rodchenko, and El Lissitzky.

## Socialist realism (from 1934)
Stalin ended with the little freedom of expression left and imposed strict guidelines and restrictions to art. They were related to the principles of revolution.  
A more traditional art style was revisited. Artists living in the USSR were subjected to this movement.  
Socialist realism was an idealized realistic art that depicted communist values.

## Cinema in the USSR
The cinema was used to "reflect" the new society. Some examples are:
- Man with a Movie Camera, by Dziga.
- Storm Over Asia, by Pudovkin.
- Chapaev, by Vasilev.
- Sergei M Eisenstein (1898-1948) is one of the most important figures. Some of his films (political and historical) are:
    - Battleship Potemkin.
    - October.
    - Alexander Nevski.
    - Ivan the Terrible.

# Architecture
The interwar era was the golden age of modern architecture.  
Avant-garde ideas (especially Cubism) were applied. This led to a movement called Rationalism. It was also known as Functionalism, as it adapted the shape of the structure to its function. Tradition was rejected and new materials were used.  
Important architects were: Mies van der Rohe and Le Corbusier.