# Spread of Industrialization
Industrialization did not take place in all the countries at the same time. It was a gradual process divided by "waves". This is because of regional proximity, the resistance from the Old Regime's economic, political & social institutions and the inability of local producers to compete with foreign industrial goods.  
Industrialization was made possible thanks to new liberal policies (thanks to the revolutionary waves), which allowed technological and scientific progress.

## Great Britain: the birth of Industrialization

As Industrialization first took place in England, it was the most industrialized country by the end of the century, especially cities such as Manchester and Liverpool.

## Second wave: Germany, France and Belgium
The north of France, Belgium, and the Rhine region in Germany had:
- A tradition in manufacturing.
- Easy transport through rivers.
- Easy access to raw materials, such as coal.

They started importing British goods, but liberal states eased internal trade by reducing internal borders. By 1860s, they reached a similar level of industrialization as Great Britain. They followed a similar pattern:
1. Agricultural production increased.
2. Demographic population increased.
3. Young people flocked to cities (rural exodus).
4. Textile, iron and steel industries grew thanks to a higher demand.
5. These industries required more industrial products. The population was attracted by these products and demanded even more industrial goods.

## Third wave: the late comers
Because of underdeveloped agriculture and survival of the Old regime, these countries started to industrialize in the last third of the century. Industrialization was also slow, which created big regional unbalances.
- Spain: Catalonia (textile) and Basque country (iron).
- Italy: Lombardy and Piedmont.
- Austria: Bohemia and Moravia.
- Russia: St Petersburg and Moscow.

## Outside of Europe: US and Japan.
These 2 countries became the main industrial powers by the end of the century.
- The United States focused on oil extraction and automobile production.
- Japan started with the Meiji Revolution.

# Second Industrial Revolution

It took place between 1870 and 1914.  
Due to industrial growth, markets were oversupplied of goods, which allowed greater capital accumulation. This meant that greater investments in technology, science and several industrial branches were made.  
Many advances were made and new technologies and countries (US, Japan, Germany) emerged.
- Oil (partly replaced coal as the main energy source):
    - It began to be used in transport, lighting and industry.
    - The first oil well was drilled in the US, in 1859.
- Electricity power (replaced steam power as the new mechanical energy): 
    - This form of energy especially benefited areas with no easy access to coal.
    - Thomas Alva Edison perfected the incandescent light bulb (1879), which was soon used to light cities.
    - The first tram lines were opened.
- Steel and aluminium (replaced iron as the new metallurgy):
    - Thanks to the Bessemer converter, greater quantities of iron were easily converted to steel with few impurities.
    - Steel made building and transport easier, as boats, railways, buildings, etc were now built with this material.
    - Aluminium and stainless steel were also obtained.
- The chemical industry (replaced the textile as the main industry):
    - Synthetic products (perfumes, fertilizers, dyes, drugs, etc) started to be popular over the natural goods.
    - Germany became the main producer of chemical products. Krupp industries were the leaders.
- Transport flourished:
    - Railways were developed:
        - More than 400.000 km of railways in Europe were created.
        - The transcontinental railway in the US connected both coasts.
    - Maritime transport:
        - Propellers and steel-hulled boats became popular.
        - World trade of products developed.
    - Automobile:
        - Benz developed the first petrol-powered automobile in 1886.
        - Gradual improvements (tyres, gears) were added.
        - The automobile industry was especially important in the US, in Detroit.
        - It became very popular in the 20th century.
    - Aviation started to be explored.
- Telephone and telegraph:
    - Allowed instant communications.
    - The first interoceanic cables were available in the 1870's.
- Banks and credits:
    - Capitalism already had a great influence on the world.
    - Banks were opened to store savers' money and to provide loans to industries and railway companies.
    - Pèreire and Rothschild were important families.
- Taylorism:
    - F.W. Taylor developed a new design of work organization, in which each worker is assigned a single, individual task in the production line.
    - Division of labour and assembly lines were created.
    - Henry Ford applied this to his automobile factories.
- Corporations:
    - They created cartels, trusts and holding companies to make agreements. This way, they prevented competition, which allowed them for complete market control.
    - Monopolies were created: Rockefeller (oil, US), Krupp (armaments and chemistry, Germany), Nobel (explosives, Sweden).
