In the 2nd half of the 19th century, the Old Regime disappeared in most European states, leading to liberal states. This meant that society was no longer divided by their origin, so social mobility was possible. However, the society was now divided according to wealth and capital. This created new inequalities.

# High class
The high bourgeoisie (bank, industrial or railways owners) were the leaders of the liberal states and they had even more political and economical influence.  
They were joined by the old nobility, which lost most of their power, but they still kept their money and lands.  
Many controlled the means of production, and used their power to their advantage.

# Middle class
They had comfortable lives. They were artisans, merchants and more importantly, liberal professionals (lawyers, teachers, doctors, engineers...), who had full access to education.

# Low classes: The proletariat or the working class
By the 19th century, a considerable part of the population was still composed of peasants. However, due to industrialization, peasants could not compete with mechanization, and unemployment was very high. As a result, they moved to cities to work in the new industries. The same happened to many artisans.  

Demographic changes and industrialization severally increased the population, which flocked to factories as workers. These workers were part of the working class or the proletariat.

## Living conditions
Workers lived in the outskirts of the cities, near the factories. They lived in overpopulated neighbourhoods called slums, were they often improvised homes called shacks.  
The area was unchecked. Sanitation, drinkable water, sewages were not provided and entire families lived in just one room. Many rooms were also shared with other families. Disease outbreaks, such as cholera, were common.

## Working conditions
The proletariat lived in extremely bad working conditions. They had 12-15 hour-shifts, 6 days a week. Wages were low, and one man did not earn enough for a family, so children had to work too, even though they earned only the half.  
No subsidies or social security were available, creating a state of insecurity. Most workers would lose their job if they had an accident, were too old, or were not able to work.  
Child labor was common. Children's hands were perfect to manipulate some of the machines, and their size was suitable to work on coal mines.  
Workers were also easily replaceable. Due to division of labor, they did not know how to create a full product. Additionally, their work was unskilled, and they only had to depend on physical strength.

# Urban planning
Due to demographic changes, the cities were expanded. These plans separated the different classes, where different services, transport and buildings for each class.  
Ensanches were urban plans where new neighborhoods were created. E.g The Ensanche of Barcelona.  
The proletariat was usually located at the outskirts, close to the factories, the middle class moved in the city center when it was reorganized, and the high class lived in the new suburbs, where the quality of the buildings was better.
