Some individuals from the middle class realized about the injustices of the new social division and developed new ideologies.

# Utopian socialism
These were the first attempts to create an economic and social equalitarian society, where solidarity was a priority.  
They were unsuccessful on the long term, because they were inefficient at large populations and required everyone to contribute.  
E.g. New Lanark, Glasgow. Founded by Robert Owen.

# Marxism or scientific socialism
A German philosopher from the middle class called Karl Marx developed his ideas on socialism.  
He published the Communist Manifiesto (1848), where he analysed class struggle and the conflicts of capitalis and Das Kapital (The Capital, 1867), where he studied the economy of capitalism.  
He worked with Friedrich Engels, a member from the high bourgeoisie.  
He analyzed the past, and concluded that history is not a sequence of events, but a constant class struggle between the workers (proletariat) and the owners of the means of production (bourgeoisie).  
He stated that when the proletariat became conscious of its exploitation, they would rise against the bourgeoisie through a revolutionary process and create an equalitarian, classless society, with no private property. They would take control of the means of the production and the state would be no longer needed.

# Anarchism
A Russian socialist revolutionary called Mikhail Bakunin developed his ideas on anarchism.  
Anarchism is the political philosophy that advocates for a classless society with no state or private property and denies authority and hierarchy.  
Because of this, they were opposed to the participation in the system (government, parliaments) and advocated for a society organized in communes, managed by the worker themselves, and where there was no private property, and everyone contributed to the general welfare. Due to their negative to participate in the system, they thought that their beliefs should be obtained through direct actions (violence, strikes, or even sabotages and terrorist attacks).  
They considered peasants to be in the main role of the revolution, opposed to Marxists, who focused on the urban workers and thought that peasants were less educated and less resistant to reactionary forces, such as religion and tradition.

# Class consciousness and actions
It took several years to develop class consciousness (being aware of the differences between their class and the others), due to extreme working conditions and lack of education, which prevented workers from being able to organize.  
However, some skilled leaders and thinkers managed to spread socialist ideas in easily understandable terms, allowing the proletariat to develop class consciousness.

# Trade unions, labour parties, and international organizations
The first actions against the changes of industrialization were taken by Luddites (England, beginning of the century), who destroyed machines because they destroyed their jobs (many were artisans or peasants).  
The first trade unions were mutual aid associations, where members paid a fee to support those who were unemployed, ill, or a close relative had died. Later, they started to organize to achieve common goals (safety standards, wage increase, social security, etc). Representatives were chosen, and they negotiated with the owners. This had very little effect, so they started to use strikes to demand better working conditions.  
The first trade unions were created in England in the 1820s. Other countries did not have them until the second half of 19th because of delayed industrialization and repression of labour revolts in 1848.  

Proletarian internationalism started in the 1860s. The International Workingmen's Association (IWA) was founded in London, 1864. It was later known as the First International. The most important thinkers (Marx and Bakunin), were the leaders, but they disagreed on proletariat's involvement in politics. This different grew so much that it caused its division in 1876.  
Working class parties were also created in the 1870s (E.g. Labour Party, German Socialist Party). They came together in 1889 to found the Second International. There were disagreements between supporters of the Marxist revolution and the revisionists, who supported gradual change of capitalism.
