# Education, culture and religion

## Increase of literacy
As cities and the middle class grew, the demand for cultural goods (education, information) increased.
Liberals thought that public instruction was a fundamental need of the society. By the end of the 19th century, many countries imposed a compulsory primary education, controlled by the state.  
As a result, illiteracy rates severally decreased during the 2nd half of the century, especially in the lower classes.

## The written press
As literacy levels increased, more people could read and write, which also allowed for the written press to be much more common. They also took advantage of instantaneous communications, such as the telegraph.  
As people were more informed about the society and the world, they started to get more involved in politics. The written press was known as the 4th power, because not only it could inform people, but also influence them with their ideas, creating the public opinion, which played a big role in the dissemination of political ideas.

## Secularization
This new culture was secular.  
The Church no longer controlled education, they had no involvement in politics, and people started to have more faith in science and technology, meaning that the Church no longer influenced people's ideologies.  
In addition to that, anti-clericalism also started to become more common, as the Catholic Church started to be seen as a bad figure.

# Science and philosophy
Philosophy was strongly linked to science.  
At the start of the 19th century, Romanticism was the predominant cultural movement, which focused on feelings and traditions instead of reason and progress.  
Due to the scientific and technical developments of the century, this later evolved into Positivism and more ways of thinking.

## Ways of thinking
- Positivism: focused the application of the scientific method in all fields. It was also thought that knowledge may only be considered if they are proven through experimentation.
- Utilitarianism: judged things based on their utility.
- Marxism: it focused on economy. Religion and culture were seen as structures that justified oppression.
- Darwinism: the theory of evolution was also interpreted into Social Darwinism.
- Materialism
- Objectivism.
- Realism
- Application of scientific method. Focus on data.

## Cultural changes
Many cultural aspects changed:
- Increase of education. Creation of schools, universities, scientific societies, research centers... They were often financed by the state, which was interested in military and industrial development of their country.
- Academic prestige was a form of social prestige. Many scientists became public figures, and prizes like the Nobel were given.
- There was a faith in science and technology. They though that science could explain everything, that progress would never end.
- Experimentalism: they were always looking for discoveries.
- Exploration of new regions.
- Secularization of the society. The Church had little to no influence on people's ideologies, and anti-clericalism started to become common. Pope Pius IX reacted against this situation in Syllabus Errorum (1864), in which he condemned liberalism and secularization, considering them as sins.

## Scientific and technological advances
- Second Industrial Revolution (1870-1914).
- Physics: Laws of thermodynamics (Kelvin), electromagnetism (Maxwell), and quantum physics (Planck).
- Chemistry: Marie Sklodowska Curie discovered radioactivity on Uranium and Radium.
- Biology: Darwin's theory of evolution was met with a strong resistance from religious groups (contradicted with the ideas of the Church). Pasteur discovered the pathogens that led to diseases, creating the principles of vaccination and pasteurization.
- Social science: scientific method was applied.
    - Psychology and sociology emerged.
    - Social Darwinism: Natural selection was applied to society.
    - Marxism had strong impact in the study of history and culture, especially in the economy. For Marx, religion and tradition were structures created by the higher classes to justify their oppression over the workers.

# Suffragism and feminism
Over the course of the 19th century, many states featured a higher suffrage base, which meant that a higher amount of men could vote. However, women still could not participate in politics. There were also many social, educational and economical inequalities. Women had to obey to the men in the family, earned half the wages, and they could not go to universities.  
However, in the 2nd half of the 19th, groups of women started to call for equality. As their main demand at the moment was the ability to vote, they were called suffragists (suffragettes in Great Britain). There were higher concentrations of suffragists in Great Britain.  
Initially, they achieved very little. Only 4 Nordic countries (Finland, Denmark, Norway, Iceland) and New Zealand recognized the women's right to vote.  
The situation would change with the Great War, where 20 million men had to fight in the war. As factories needed more workers, women joined the workforce and proved that they were able to do their job as efficiently as men.  
After the Great War, many western countries recognized women's right to vote (US, Spain, Germany, Canada, Great Britain...). However, legal and economical inequality was still big until the 20th century. Inequality is still considered as a problem today.

# Art
There were 2 literary movements:
- Realism: aimed to reflect the society and the reality as it is, without idealizing it. Important writers include Clarín, Galdós, Balzac, Dickens and Dsotoyevski.
- Naturalism: based on Realism, but it focused on the importance of the environment and the biological inheritance on the person's behavior and living conditions. Important writers included Émile Zola (France) and Emilia Pardo Bazán (Spain).

Painting:
- Realism and Naturalism: similar to the literary movements.
- Impressionism: aimed to capture fast moving scenes and usually depicted an environment. The reality was distorted and idealized.
- Post-Impressionism: subjective predominance of colors.
- Pointillism: used points.

Sculpture: the main sculptor of this period was Auguste Rodin. His works were characterized by an unfinished look.

Architecture: powered by the industrialization.
- Steel buildings: thanks to the increased production of iron and steel industries and new materials. They had a very industrial look. Bridges and railway stations became common.
- Crystal palaces.
- Skyscrapers and high buildings: influenced by New York buildings. Used by companies to have a higher number of employees in the same building. E.g. Chicago School.
- Revivalism: there was a trend on reviving historical architectural orders:
    - Gothic.
    - Romanesque.
    - Renaissance.
    - Baroque.
    - Mudejar/Moorish (Spain).
