# Democratic countries
Liberal members of the parliament started to support the wealthy middle and high classes, focusing more on their demands. As a result, liberalism became quite conservative and censitarian suffrage was common.  
However, thanks to liberal revolutions, higher literacy rates and the creation of new political parties, liberalism changed. Some members started to support the middle and low classes and their demands. These were called democrats and were in favor of universal suffrage, secularization and social rights. They became important in the second half of the century.  
As a result, at the end of the 19th century, universal suffrage was approved by some parliaments. However, women's right to vote was restricted until the end of the Great War.

## Great Britain
During this period, Great Britain was under the monarchy of queen Victoria (1837-1901). It was long enough that the period was known as the Victorian Britain.  
The country's politics was very stable. As a result, Great Britain experienced a great economic and kept its global hegemony.  
The parliament was divided into 2 political parties: the Conservative Party (Tories) and the Liberal Party (Whigs).  
The Whigs wanted to increase the population that could vote and approved reforms to increase the suffrage base in the 2nd half of the century. Ironically, most of the lower classes turned to the Labor Party, which would subsequently replace the Liberal Party.

## France
During the Franco-Prussian War (1870-1871), Napoleon III was captured, the II Empire was destroyed, and the Second Reich declared.  
A socialist, radical movement took place, which led to a socialist revolutionary to take control of Paris. It lasted 2 months before being repressed and it was the first worker's government.  
After that, the III Republic was declared, and democratic measures were approved: spread of education and culture, labor protection, secularization and universal suffrage.  
At the end of the century, the Dreyfus Affair took place. A Jewish military called Dreyfus was put on trial even though he was innocent. This scandal severely affected the traditional elites and the military, which was very conservative.

## United States
In the 19th century, the US was an growing country.  
During the 2nd half of the century, many people migrated to the US, especially Europeans, in search of new opportunities. They helped to the development of the country: colonization of the west, exploitation of resources, and industrialization in the North-East. In the north, ghettos were formed from different ethnicities (Irish, Polish, Spanish). Initially, this produced health and public order issues (gangs), but they eventually integrated into the new society thanks to the country's great administration.  
The country was very stable politically speaking. It had a liberal, two party system, with universal manhood suffrage. Every 4 years, 2 Political Parties contested for power: Republicans (conservatives) and Democrats ( conservative-progressives).  
There were many differences between 2 regions:
- The North developed industrialization, urbanization and trade. It had a higher ratio of immigrants, who opposed slavery.
- The South had a rural and traditional attitude and mostly depended on slave labor (More than 4 million at the time).

Because of this separation, there were tensions between both regions. Many abolitionist works and propaganda were spread. The republican Abraham Lincoln, a known abolitionist, was elected president in 1860, and he abolished slavery. This threatened the South's economic base, starting the American Civil War (1861-1865), which confronted:
- The Confederation: south states. It was formed of South Carolina and other 10 states.
- The Union: states from the north.

The war was won by the Northern states, and Southern states were forced to abolish slavery.  
However, economic and social injustices were still common. The black population was still restricted from voting, and racial segregation or acts of violence were committed frequently.

# Authoritarian countries
In these countries, liberalism took over the Old Regime after the revolutionary waves of 1848. However, the new systems were quite conservative and authoritarian. There was a "Constitution" and some rights, but suffrage was restricted.  
Governments were chosen by the emperor, and they could act without parliament's approval.  
The army and the military were tools used by the state to control the population.

## Germany
After the Unification in 1871, Bismarck kept being the Prime Minister.  
There was liberal system and a parliament (Reichstag), but Prussian elites kept most of the power, so there was not the same degree of democratization as countries of the west.  
Socialism already had a strong impact in Germany. The SPD (German Socialist Party) was the most influential socialist party in Europe. To prevent social unrest, Bismarck approved social security laws.  
Germany experienced great industrial development, boosted by its efficient administration, which allowed it to one of the be one of the greatest powers.

## Austria
Austria also experienced development, especially in culture and arts.  
Its political situation was similar to the one of Germany. After 1848, they had to approve a liberal constitution. Representatives of the Imperial Diet were chosen.  
However, Austria had many different ethnicities and languages, and nationalist tensions forced the Austrian Empire to become the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1867. Hungarians were the largest minority and from this point they had their own parliament and a political and institutional system.

## Russia
Russia was very close to the Old Regime in the 19th century. Feudal systems lasted for over a millennium, industrialization did not arrive at all and absolutism was still in place (tsars).  
After the war of Crimea (1853-1861), in which Russia was defeated against the Ottomans, British, French and Sardinians and lost Crimea, tsar Alexander II realized that Russia desperately needed modernization reforms. He abolished serfdom, and feudal obligations in 1861 and introduced other reforms that favored the judicial system, education, administration and the military. Industrialization and the creation of railways were also promoted.  
In the political side, tars kept absolutism (autocracy).

## Ottoman Empire
It was in great political, economical and social decline.  
Nationalist tensions kept emerging, and the Ottoman Empire kept fighting against independentists (Romania, Serbia, Bulgaria) in the Balkans, who received support from other Slav countries, such as Russia and Austria. As a result, this territories were very unstable.  
By the interwar era, the Ottoman Empire will be dissolved.
