The Sexenio Democrático took place between 1868 and 1874, where democratic ideas were put place in the Spanish government for the first time. It was a very unstable period due to internal changes and conflicts.

# Precedents: Revolution "La Gloriosa" (1868)

## Causes: crisis of moderantism
During the crisis of moderantism, the opposition (republicans, democrats, progressives, unitarians) was excluded from the parliament. The military, politicians and students were repressed. Censorship did not allow the opposition to disseminate their ideas either. This caused a great social unrest.  
In addition to that, Spain was under an economical and subsistence crisis.

## Pact of Ostend (1866)
The opposition, led by O'Donnell resorted to conspiration abroad.  
In this pact, they committed to expel the queen (Isabel II) from the government, summon a Constituent Assembly create a political system based on democratic ideals.

## Revolt (1868)
In September 1868, a successful revolt in Cádiz was led by Juan Prim and Serrano. Their actions were supported by the population.  
Isabel's army was defeated and the queen was forced into exile to France.

# Provisional Government (1868-1871)
The Regents Prim and Serrano summoned Cortes Constituyentes elected by universal manhood suffrage.  
The Constitution of 1869 was approved, which featured universal manhood suffrage, freedom of religion, new rights and national sovereignty.  
A revolt in Cuba started, due to the lack of freedoms (slavery) and political status of the territory.
It was decided to conserve the monarchy, but with a different dynasty. Despite the difficulties, Amadeo of Savoy was chosen, starting the next period.

# Reign of Amadeo I (1871-1873)
His reign started with the assassination of his main supporter, Prim. His death divided the governing parties.  
His arrival also sparked the Third Carlist War (1872-1876).  
He finally abdicated on February 10th of 1873 due to lack of support, opposition, conflicts and instability.

# First Spanish Republic (1873-1874)
When Amadeo resigned, the I Republic was declared. Republicans were an important party in this period.  
Republicans were divided into unitarians (central government from Madrid) and federalists (more autonomy for the provinces). As their ideas were completely opposed, they could not agree. Their disputes led to instability.  
Federalists tried to impose their views with popular support. They started a movement called Cantonalismo, which threatened to divide Spain into cantones. This movement tried to separate from the central government. It was seen as a threat in the eyes of the most conservatives and the military.  
It was a very unstable period, due to the previous conflicts. There were 4 presidents (Figueras, Pi y Margall, Salmerón, Castelar) in less than a year, before ending.

# The Transition (1874-1875)
The Third Carlist War, Cuban Revolts, workers' strikes, federalist movements and other conflicts caused great instability and threatened the unity of Spain.  
Because of this reason, unitarian general Pavia staged a coup d'etat in January 1874 to put Serrano in a provisional government, in which he repressed the conflicts and focused on restoring the order.  
This period was used by Antonio Cánovas del Castillo, a (very conservative) supporter of the return of the Bourbon dynasty, to spread his views (Manifiesto de Sandhurst).  
Pronunciamento de Sagunto: General Martínez Campos led an uprising at the end of 1874 in Sagunto (Valencia) that ultimately restored the Bourbon dynasty in a violent way.
