# Reign of Alfonso XII (1875-1885)
The reign of Alfonso XII started from the pronunciamiento of Sagunto, where general Martínez Campos led an uprising and restored the Bourbon dynasty.  
Alfonso XII, son of Isabel II, promised to comply with a Constitution and a liberal system.  
The political system was led by his main supporter, Antonio Cánovas del Castillo. He was a great admirer of the British political system.

## Constitution of 1876
It was a conservative constitution.
- Sovereignty was divided into the king and the Parliament.
- Bicameral Parliament: The Congress was elected. The senate had part elected, part appointed by the king, and some were members by right.
- Suffrage was not regulated by the Constitution. It was censitarian until 1890. The Liberal Party extended the suffrage base in 1890.
- Many rights were declared, but it was a slow process. Freedom of expression and of association were harshly restricted.
- Religion: Catholicism was recognized as the official religion. Other religions were permitted but their public expressions were prohibited.

## Turnismo
It was the moderate political system created by Cánovas del Castillo, which featured an exchange of power between 2 parties:
- Conservative Party: led by Cánovas del Castillo. They defended a moderate regime.
- Liberal Party. led by Sagasta. They defended a progressive regime.

The king would choose the party to govern and they would call for general elections. Then the manipulation of the elections took place.  
To ensure that the correct party would win, a whole machinery for manipulation was created. Local oligarchs (caciques) would receive the desired results and they would use any method to control the votes (bribery, threats, miscounts...).  
This meant that the population was completely disconnected from the government, and that the elections were useless, as the governing party would be either Conservative or Liberal. Additionally, the opposition and other parties were completely left out and marginalized.  
However, this system turned out to work without problems, as it gave Spain stability, even though it was just an impression. Military conflicts such as the Third Carlist War or uprisings were pacified. The 2 parties also agreed to this system, and even could respect each other, which avoided many problems.

# Regency of Maria Cristina de Habsburgo (1885-1902)
When Alfonso XII died of tuberculosis, his wife Maria Cristina de Habsburgo was pregnant. However, it was not known whether it would be a boy or a girl. If it were a girl, opposition to her inheriting the throne would emerge. Because of that reason, Sagasta and Cánovas del Castillo agreed to protect their political system (turnismo) and to recognize Maria Cristina as the Regent no matter if it were a boy or a girl. This is known as the Pacto del Pardo.  
In the end, it turned out to be a boy (Alfonso XIII), which avoided some problems. However, the regency of Maria Cristina would meet many problems.

# Political opposition
It was increasingly strong after the death of Alfonso XII.
- Workers' movements:
    - The First International sent some delegates to Spain, who founded the FRE-AIT (Federación Regional de la Asociación Internacional de Trabajadores), with a strong anarchist influence.
    - Anarchism was strong in Spain (because there were still more peasants than urban workers), especially in Andalusia and Catalonia, with the foundation of the CNT (Confederación Nacional de Trabajadores) trade union.
    - Socialism spread as well, but it was especially important in Madrid, where Pablo Iglesias founded the PSOE (Partido Socialista Obrero Español) party in 1885 and the UGT (Unión General de Trabajadores) trade union in 1888.
- Republicans kept having some representation, especially in big cities.
- Regionalism was a 'nationalist' movement in Spain, where some regions or provinces demanded a higher autonomy or role in Spanish politics.
    - Catalonia: there was a cultural movement that revived their language and culture. The Lliga Regionalista was founded in 1901 and demanded a higher role in Spanish politics.
    - Basque Country: Sabino Arana founded the PNV (Partido Nacionalista Vasco), which had a racial component and gave importance on traditions. It evolved from carlism.
    - There was a movement in Galicia, but it had a smaller impact.

Due to the rigging of elections, most of these political parties had little to no representation in the Parliament, and they were not taken seriously, causing social unrest.  
The workers achieved, though strikes a slight improvement by the end of the century, with wage increases, the approval of laws that regulated child labour, trade union rights and compensations for work accidents.  
The anarchists resorted to direct, violent actions, such as the Bombing of Liceu in Barcelona in 1893 and the magnicide of Cánovas del Castillo in 1897.
   
## Disaster of '98
Cuban revolts still kept emerging. On top of that, the United States was involved in a war against Spain (Cuban Independence War) in 1895, in which the US supported the Cuban independence movements against Spain. 80000 Spanish soldiers were sent to war, only to be defeated in 1898.  
Cuba achieved independence, and the Philippines and Puerto Rico were lost to the US. This meant that Spain lost an important financial source.  
This event meant a huge blow for Spain's morale. The Spanish glory was destroyed, political institutions and all the system lost its credibility, starting a period of crisis.
