# 17th century
England created 13 colonies or areas in the east coast of North America.  
Many Europeans (British mainly) migrated to the colonies to start a new life.
- Many of them had fled political or religious persecution. This is the case for the Pilgrim Fathers.

They thrived during this period.

## Organization
There was a governor, whose responsibilities and powers were restricted to military matters.  
For all other matters, the colonies organized themselves in colonial assemblies, so they had a degree of autonomy.  
Class society did not exist.
- There was social mobility.
- There was no hereditary aristocracy.
- There was an abundance of members of the wealthy middle class, who were open to the new liberal ideas.


# Independence

## Causes
The 7 Years' War took place, mainly in the colonial areas.
- Great Britain's economy was affected.
- A large, permanent army was created. To fund it, George III approved laws to increase the taxes in the colonies (Sugar, Tea and Stamp acts).

## Events
The Boston Tea Party took place, where colonies threw tea boxes to the sea as a protest.
- The slogan was "No taxation without representation"

Delegates of each colony gathered in the Continental Congress (Philadelphia, 1776) and redacted the Declaration of independence of the United States of America.


# American Revolutionary War (1775-1783)
George III opposed to the independence and tried to recover the colonies.  
The colonists, France, Spain and the Netherlands fought against England.  
George Washington led the armies. The battles of Saratoga and Yorktown were won.  
Great Britain finally recognized the independence in the Peace of Paris (1783).


# Constitution and democracy
The delegates gathered again in Philadelphia and redacted a Constitution (1787), inspired by liberal ideas.

## Main points
- The United States of America is Federal republic in which government functions are divided into the capital (Washington DC) and the states.  
- The head of the state is the President, who is indirectly elected every 4 years by the House of Representatives.  
- There is separation of powers:
    - Legislative: Congress and Senate.
    - Executive: President.
    - Judicial: Supreme Court.
- There was a series of amendments, which recognized more rights and liberties.
- Class society is dissolved.
